URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2005.00928
Type: PDF
Length: 27544 chars

--- Content ---

Quantifying Attention Flow in Transformers
Samira Abnar
ILLC, University of Amsterdam
s.abnar@uva.nl
Willem Zuidema
ILLC, University of Amsterdam
w.h.zuidema@uva.nl
Abstract
In the Transformer model, “self-attention”
combines information from attended embed-
dings into the representation of the focal em-
bedding in the next layer. Thus, across lay-
ers of the Transformer, information originating
from different tokens gets increasingly mixed.
This makes attention weights unreliable as ex-
planations probes. In this paper, we consider
the problem of quantifying this ﬂow of infor-
mation through self-attention. We propose two
methods for approximating the attention to in-
put tokens given attention weights, attention
rollout and attention ﬂow, as post hoc methods
when we use attention weights as the relative
relevance of the input tokens. We show that
these methods give complementary views on
the ﬂow of information, and compared to raw
attention, both yield higher correlations with
importance scores of input tokens obtained us-
ing an ablation method and input gradients.
1
Introduction
Attention (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Vaswani et al.,
2017) has become the key building block of neu-
ral sequence processing models, and visualizing
attention weights is the easiest and most popular
approach to interpret a model’s decisions and to
gain insights about its internals (Vaswani et al.,
2017; Xu et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2016; Lee et al.,
2017; Dehghani et al., 2019; Rockt¨aschel et al.,
2016; Chen and Ji, 2019; Coenen et al., 2019; Clark
et al., 2019). Although it is wrong to equate atten-
tion with explanation (Pruthi et al., 2019; Jain and
Wallace, 2019), it can offer plausible and mean-
ingful interpretations (Wiegreffe and Pinter, 2019;
Vashishth et al., 2019; Vig, 2019). In this paper,
we focus on problems arising when we move to the
higher layers of a model, due to lack of token iden-
tiﬁability of the embeddings in higher layers (Brun-
ner et al., 2020).
We propose two simple but effective methods to
compute attention scores to input tokens (i.e., token
attention) at each layer, by taking raw attentions
(i.e., embedding attention) of that layer as well as
those from the precedent layers. These methods
are based on modelling the information ﬂow in the
network with a DAG (Directed Acyclic Graph), in
which the nodes are input tokens and hidden em-
beddings, edges are the attentions from the nodes
in each layer to those in the previous layer, and
the weights of the edges are the attention weights.
The ﬁrst method, attention rollout, assumes that
the identities of input tokens are linearly combined
through the layers based on the attention weights.
To adjust attention weights, it rolls out the weights
to capture the propagation of information from in-
put tokens to intermediate hidden embeddings. The
second method, attention ﬂow, considers the atten-
tion graph as a ﬂow network. Using a maximum
ﬂow algorithm, it computes maximum ﬂow values,
from hidden embeddings (sources) to input tokens
(sinks). In both methods, we take the residual con-
nection in the network into account to better model
the connections between input tokens and hidden
embedding. We show that compared to raw atten-
tion, the token attentions from attention rollout and
attention ﬂow have higher correlations with the im-
portance scores obtained from input gradients as
well as blank-out, an input ablation based attribu-
tion method. Furthermore, we visualize the token
attention weights and demonstrate that they are bet-
ter approximations of how input tokens contribute
to a predicted output, compared to raw attention.
It is noteworthy that the techniques we propose
in this paper, are not toward making hidden embed-
dings more identiﬁable, or providing better atten-
tion weights for better performance, but a new set
of attention weights that take token identity prob-
lem into consideration and can serve as a better
diagnostic tool for visualization and debugging.
arXiv:2005.00928v2  [cs.LG]  31 May 2020

(a) Embedding attentions
(b) Attention rollout
(c) Attention ﬂow
Figure 1: Visualisation of attention weights.
Figure 2: Raw Attention maps for the CLS token at
different layers.
2
Setups and Problem Statement
In our analysis, we focus on the verb number pre-
diction task, i.e., predicting singularity or plurality
of a verb of a sentence, when the input is the sen-
tence up to the verb position. We use the subject-
verb agreement dataset (Linzen et al., 2016). This
task and dataset are convenient choices, as they of-
fer a clear hypothesis about what part of the input
is essential to get the right solution. For instance,
given “the key to the cabinets” as the input, we
know that attending to “key” helps the model pre-
dict singular as output while attending to “cabinets”
(an agreement attractor, with the opposite number)
is unhelpful.
We train a Transformer encoder, with GPT-
2 Transformer blocks as described in (Radford
et al., 2019; Wolf et al., 2019) (without masking).
The model has 6 layers, and 8 heads, with hid-
den/embedding size of 128. Similar to Bert (De-
vlin et al., 2019) we add a CLS token and use
its embedding in the ﬁnal layer as the input to
the classiﬁer. The accuracy of the model on the
subject-verb agreement task is 0.96. To facilitate
replication of our experiments we will make the
implementations of the models we use and algo-
rithms we introduce publicly available at https:
//github.com/samiraabnar/attention_flow.
We start by visualizing raw attention in Figure 1a
(like Vig 2019). The example given here is cor-
rectly classiﬁed. Crucially, only in the ﬁrst couple
of layers, there are some distinctions in the atten-
tion patterns for different positions, while in higher
layers the attention weights are rather uniform. Fig-
ure 2 (left) gives raw attention scores of the CLS
token over input tokens (x-axis) at different lay-
ers (y-axis), which similarly lack an interpretable
pattern.These observations reﬂect the fact that as
we go deeper into the model, the embeddings are
more contextualized and may all carry similar in-
formation. This underscores the need to track down
attention weights all the way back to the input layer
and is in line with ﬁndings of Serrano and Smith
(2019), who show that attention weights do not
necessarily correspond to the relative importance
of input tokens.
To quantify the usefulness of raw attention
weights, and the two alternatives that we consider
in the next section, besides input gradients, we
employ an input ablation method, blank-out, to es-
timate an importance score for each input token.
Blank-out replaces each token in the input, one
by one, with UNK and measures how much it af-
fects the predicted probability of the correct class.
We compute the Spearman’s rank correlation co-
efﬁcient between the attention weights of the CLS
embedding in the ﬁnal layer and the importance
scores from blank-out. As shown in the ﬁrst row
of Table 1, the correlation between raw attention
weights of the CLS token and blank-out scores is
rather low, except for the ﬁrst layer. As we can see
in Table 2 this is also the case when we compute
the correlations with input gradients.
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
L6
Raw
0.69±0.27
0.10±0.43
-0.11±0.49
-0.09±0.52
0.20±0.45
0.29±0.39
Rollout
0.32±0.26
0.38±0.27
0.51±0.26
0.62±0.26
0.70±0.25
0.71±0.24
Flow
0.32±0.26
0.44±0.29
0.70±0.25
0.70±0.22
0.71±0.22
0.70±0.22
Table 1: SpearmanR correlation of attention based im-
portance with blank-out scores for 2000 samples from
the test set for the verb number prediction model.
3
Attention Rollout and Attention Flow
Attention rollout and attention ﬂow recursively
compute the token attentions in each layer of a

L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
L6
Raw
0.53±0.33
0.16±0.38
-0.06±0.42
0.00±0.47
0.24±0.40
0.46±0.35
Rollout
0.22±0.31
0.27±0.32
0.39±0.32
0.47±0.32
0.53±0.32
0.54±0.31
Flow
0.22±0.31
0.31±0.34
0.54±0.32
0.61±0.28
0.60±0.28
0.61±0.28
Table 2: SpearmanR correlation of attention based im-
portance with input gradients for 2000 samples from
the test set for the verb number prediction model.
given model given the embedding attentions as in-
put. They differ in the assumptions they make
about how attention weights in lower layers affect
the ﬂow of information to the higher layers and
whether to compute the token attentions relative to
each other or independently.
To compute how information propagates from
the input layer to the embeddings in higher lay-
ers, it is crucial to take the residual connections
in the model into account as well as the attention
weights. In a Transformer block, both self-attention
and feed-forward networks are wrapped by resid-
ual connections, i.e., the input to these modules is
added to their output. When we only use attention
weights to approximate the ﬂow of information in
Transformers, we ignore the residual connections.
But these connections play a signiﬁcant role in
tying corresponding positions in different layers.
Hence, to compute attention rollout and attention
ﬂow, we augment the attention graph with extra
weights to represent residual connections. Given
the attention module with residual connection, we
compute values in layer l+1 as Vl+1 = Vl+WattVl,
where Watt is the attention matrix. Thus, we have
Vl+1 = (Watt + I)Vl. So, to account for residual
connections, we add an identity matrix to the at-
tention matrix and re-normalize the weights. This
results in A = 0.5Watt + 0.5I, where A is the raw
attention updated by residual connections.
Furthermore, analyzing individual heads re-
quires accounting for mixing of information be-
tween heads through a position-wise feed-forward
network in Transformer block. Using attention roll-
out and attention ﬂow, it is also possible to analyze
each head separately. We explain in more details
in Appendix A.1. However, in our analysis in this
paper, for simplicity, we average the attention at
each layer over all heads.
Attention rollout
Attention rollout is an intuitive
way of tracking down the information propagated
from the input layer to the embeddings in the higher
layers. Given a Transformer with L layers, we want
to compute the attention from all positions in layer
li to all positions in layer lj, where j < i. In the
attention graph, a path from node v at position k
in li, to node u at position m in lj, is a series of
edges that connect these two nodes. If we look
at the weight of each edge as the proportion of
information transferred between two nodes, we
can compute how much of the information at v
is propagated to u through a particular path by
multiplying the weights of all edges in that path.
Since there may be more than one path between
two nodes in the attention graph, to compute the
total amount of information propagated from v to u,
we sum over all possible paths between these two
nodes. At the implementation level, to compute the
attentions from li to lj, we recursively multiply the
attention weights matrices in all the layers below.
˜A(li) =

A(li) ˜A(li−1)
if i > j
A(li)
if i = j
(1)
In this equation, ˜A is attention rollout, A is raw at-
tention and the multiplication operation is a matrix
multiplication. With this formulation, to compute
input attention we set j = 0.
Attention ﬂow
In graph theory, a ﬂow network
is a directed graph with a “capacity” associated
with each edge. Formally, given G = (V, E) is a
graph, where V is the set of nodes, and E is the set
of edges in G; C = {cuv ∈R | ∀u, v where eu,v ∈
E ∧u̸ = v} denotes the capacities of the edges and
s, t ∈V are the source and target (sink) nodes re-
spectively; ﬂow is a mapping of edges to real num-
bers, f : E →R, that satisﬁes two conditions: (a)
capacity constraint: for each edge the ﬂow value
should not exceed its capacity, |fuv ≤cuv|; (b)
ﬂow conservation: for all nodes except s and t the
input ﬂow should be equal to output ﬂow –sum
of the ﬂow of outgoing edges should be equal to
sum of the ﬂow of incoming edges. Given a ﬂow
network, a maximum ﬂow algorithm ﬁnds a ﬂow
which has the maximum possible value between s
and t (Cormen et al., 2009).
Treating the attention graph as a ﬂow network,
where the capacities of the edges are attention
weights, using any maximum ﬂow algorithm, we
can compute the maximum attention ﬂow from any
node in any of the layers to any of the input nodes.
We can use this maximum-ﬂow-value as an approx-
imation of the attention to input nodes. In attention
ﬂow, the weight of a single path is the minimum
value of the weights of the edges in the path, in-
stead of the product of the weights. Besides, we

attention rollout
attention ﬂow
Figure 3: Attention maps for the CLS token
.
can not compute the attention for node s to node
t by adding up the weights of all paths between
these two nodes, since there might be an overlap
between the paths and this might result in overﬂow
in the overlapping edges.
It is noteworthy that both of the proposed meth-
ods can be computed in polynomial time. O(d∗n2)
for attention rollout and O(d2 ∗n4) for attention
ﬂow, where d is the depth of the model, and n is
the number of tokens.
4
Analysis and Discussion
Now, we take a closer look at these three views of
attention. Figure 1 depicts raw attention, attention
rollout and attention ﬂow for a correctly classiﬁed
example across different layers. It is noteworthy
that the ﬁrst layer of attention rollout and attention
ﬂow are the same, and their only difference with
raw attention is the addition of residual connec-
tions. As we move to the higher layers, we see that
the residual connections fade away. Moreover, in
contrast to raw attention, the patterns of attention
rollout and attention ﬂow become more distinctive
in the higher layers.
Figures 2 and 3 show the weights from raw at-
tention, attention rollout and attention ﬂow for the
CLS embedding over input tokens (x-axis) in all
6 layers (y-axis) for three examples. The ﬁrst ex-
ample is the same as the one in Figure 1. The sec-
ond example is “the article on NNP large systems
<?>”. The model correctly classiﬁes this exam-
ple and changing the subject of the missing verb
from “article” to “articles” ﬂips the decision of the
model. The third example is “here the NNS differ
in that the female <?>”, which is a miss-classiﬁed
example and again changing “NNS” (plural noun)
to “NNP” (singular proper noun) ﬂips the decision
of the model.
For all cases, the raw attention weights are al-
most uniform above layer three (discussed before).
raw attention
attention rollout
attention ﬂow
(a) “The author talked to Sara about mask book.”
raw attention
attention rollout
attention ﬂow
(b) “Mary convinced John of mask love.”
Figure 4: Bert attention maps. We look at the attention
weights from the mask embedding to the two potential
references for it, e.g. “author” and “Sara” in (a) and
“Mary” and “John” in (b). The bars, at the left, show
the relative predicted probability for the two possible
pronouns, “his” and “her”.
In the case of the correctly classiﬁed example, we
observe that both attention rollout and attention
ﬂow assign relatively high weights to both the sub-
ject of the verb, “article’ and the attractor, “sys-
tems”. For the miss-classiﬁed example, both at-
tention rollout and attention ﬂow assign relatively
high scores to the “NNS” token which is not the
subject of the verb. This can explain the wrong
prediction of the model.
The main difference between attention rollout
and attention ﬂow is that attention ﬂow weights are
amortized among the set of most attended tokens,
as expected. Attention ﬂow can indicate a set of
input tokens that are important for the ﬁnal decision.
Thus we do not get sharp distinctions among them.
On the other hand, attention rollout weights are
more focused compared to attention ﬂow weights,
which is sensible for the third example but not as
much for the second one.
L1
L3
L5
L6
Raw
0.12 ± 0.21
0.09 ± 0.21
0.08 ± 0.20
0.09 ± 0.21
Rollout
0.11 ± 0.19
0.12 ± 0.21
0.13 ± 0.21
0.13 ± 0.20
Flow
0.11 ± 0.19
0.11 ± 0.21
0.12 ± 0.22
0.14 ± 0.21
Table 3: SpearmanR correlation of attention based im-
portance with input gradients for 100 samples from the
test set for the DistillBERT model ﬁne tuned on SST-2.
Furthermore, as shown in Table 1 and 2 both
attention rollout and attention ﬂow, are better
correlated with blank-out scores and input gradi-
ents compared to raw attention, but attention ﬂow

weights are more reliable than attention rollout.
The difference between these two methods is rooted
in their different views of attention weights. At-
tention ﬂow views them as capacities, and at every
step of the algorithm, it uses as much of the capac-
ity as possible. Hence, attention ﬂow computes the
maximum possibility of token identities to propa-
gate to the higher layers. Whereas attention rollout
views them as proportion factors and at every step,
it allows token identities to be propagated to higher
layers exactly based on this proportion factors. This
makes attention rollout stricter than attention ﬂow,
and so we see that attention rollout provides us with
more focused attention patterns. However, since
we are making many simplifying assumptions, the
strictness of attention rollout does not lead to more
accurate results, and the relaxation of attention ﬂow
seems to be a useful property.
At last, to illustrate the application of atten-
tion ﬂow and attention rollout on different tasks
and different models, we examine them on two
pretrained BERT models.
We use the models
available at https://github.com/huggingface/
transformers.
Table 3 shows the correlation of the importance
score obtained from raw attention, attention rollout
and attention ﬂow from a DistillBERT (Sanh et al.,
2019) model ﬁne-tuned to solve “SST-2” (Socher
et al., 2013), the sentiment analysis task from the
glue benchmark (Wang et al., 2018). Even though
for this model, all three methods have very low
correlation with the input gradients, we can still see
that attention rollout and attention ﬂow are slightly
better than raw attention.
Furthermore, in Figure 4, we show an example
of applying these methods to a pre-trained Bert
to see how it resolves the pronouns in a sentence.
What we do here is to feed the model with a sen-
tence, masking a pronoun. Next, we look at the
prediction of the model for the masked word and
compare the probabilities assigned to “her” and
“his”. Then we look at raw attention, attention roll-
out and attention ﬂow weights of the embeddings
for the masked pronoun at all the layers. In the
ﬁrst example, in Figure 4a, attention rollout and
attention ﬂow are consistent with each other and
the prediction of the model. Whereas, the ﬁnal
layer of raw attention does not seem to be consis-
tent with the prediction of the models, and it varies
a lot across different layers. In the second exam-
ple, in Figure 4b, only attention ﬂow weights are
consistent with the prediction of the model.
5
Conclusion
Translating embedding attentions to token atten-
tions can provide us with better explanations about
models’ internals. Yet, we should be cautious about
our interpretation of these weights, because, we
are making many simplifying assumptions when
we approximate information ﬂow in a model with
the attention weights. Our ideas are simple and
task/architecture agnostic. In this paper, we in-
sisted on sticking with simple ideas that only re-
quire attention weights and can be easily employed
in any task or architecture that uses self-attention.
We should note that all our analysis in this paper is
for a Transformer encoder, with no casual masking.
Since in Transformer decoder, future tokens are
masked, naturally there is more attention toward
initial tokens in the input sequence, and both atten-
tion rollout and attention ﬂow will be biased toward
these tokens. Hence, to apply these methods on a
Transformer decoder, we should ﬁrst normalize
based on the receptive ﬁeld of attention.
Following this work, we can build the attention
graph with effective attention weights (Brunner
et al., 2020) instead of raw attentions. Furthermore,
we can come up with a new method that adjusts the
attention weights using gradient-based attribution
methods (Ancona et al., 2019).
Acknowledgements
We thank Mostafa Dehghani, Wilker Aziz, and the
anonymous reviewers for their valuable feedback
and comments on this work. The work presented
here was funded by the Netherlands Organization
for Scientiﬁc Research (NWO), through a Gravita-
tion Grant 024.001.006 to the Language in Interac-
tion Consortium.
References
Marco Ancona, Enea Ceolini, Cengiz ¨Oztireli, and
Markus Gross. 2019.
Gradient-Based Attribution
Methods, pages 169–191. Springer International
Publishing.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. 2015.
Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate.
In proceedings of
the 2015 International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations.
Gino Brunner, Yang Liu, Damian Pascual, Oliver
Richter, Massimiliano Ciaramita, and Roger Watten-

hofer. 2020. On identiﬁability in transformers. In
International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions.
Hanjie Chen and Yangfeng Ji. 2019. Improving the in-
terpretability of neural sentiment classiﬁers via data
augmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.04225.
Kevin Clark, Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2019. What does BERT
look at? an analysis of BERT’s attention. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 ACL Workshop BlackboxNLP:
Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for
NLP, pages 276–286, Florence, Italy. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Andy Coenen, Emily Reif, Ann Yuan, Been Kim,
Adam Pearce, Fernanda Vi´egas, and Martin Watten-
berg. 2019. Visualizing and measuring the geometry
of bert. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.02715.
Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson, Ronald L.
Rivest, and Clifford Stein. 2009.
Introduction to
Algorithms, Third Edition, 3rd edition.
The MIT
Press.
Mostafa Dehghani, Stephan Gouws, Oriol Vinyals,
Jakob Uszkoreit, and Łukasz Kaiser. 2019. Univer-
sal transformers. In proceedings of the 2019 Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019.
BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing.
In proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Sarthak Jain and Byron C. Wallace. 2019. Attention
is not Explanation. In proceedings of the 2019 Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, pages 3543–3556. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Jaesong Lee, Joong-Hwi Shin, and Jun-Seok Kim.
2017.
Interactive visualization and manipulation
of attention-based neural machine translation.
In
proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing: System
Demonstrations, pages 121–126.
Tal Linzen, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Yoav Goldberg.
2016.
Assessing the ability of LSTMs to learn
syntax-sensitive dependencies. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, 4:521–
535.
Danish Pruthi, Mansi Gupta, Bhuwan Dhingra, Gra-
ham Neubig, and Zachary C Lipton. 2019. Learning
to deceive with attention-based explanations. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1909.07913.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan,
Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI
Blog, 1(8).
Tim Rockt¨aschel, Edward Grefenstette, Karl Moritz
Hermann, Tomas Kocisky, and Phil Blunsom. 2016.
Reasoning about entailment with neural attention.
In International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations (ICLR).
Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and
Thomas Wolf. 2019. Distilbert, a distilled version of
bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter.
Soﬁa Serrano and Noah A. Smith. 2019. Is attention
interpretable?
In proceedings of the 57th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason
Chuang, Christopher D. Manning, Andrew Ng, and
Christopher Potts. 2013.
Recursive deep models
for semantic compositionality over a sentiment tree-
bank.
In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 1631–1642, Seattle, Washington, USA. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Shikhar Vashishth, Shyam Upadhyay, Gaurav Singh
Tomar, and Manaal Faruqui. 2019.
Attention in-
terpretability across nlp tasks.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.11218.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems, pages 5998–6008.
Jesse Vig. 2019. Visualizing attention in transformer-
based
language
models.
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:1904.02679.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Fe-
lix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel Bowman. 2018.
GLUE: A multi-task benchmark and analysis plat-
form for natural language understanding.
In Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop Black-
boxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Net-
works for NLP, pages 353–355, Brussels, Belgium.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yequan Wang, Minlie Huang, Li Zhao, et al. 2016.
Attention-based lstm for aspect-level sentiment clas-
siﬁcation. In proceedings of the 2016 conference on
empirical methods in natural language processing,
pages 606–615.
Sarah Wiegreffe and Yuval Pinter. 2019. Attention is
not not explanation. In proceedings of the 2019 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and the 9th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
IJCNLP). Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.

Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien
Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier-
ric Cistac, Tim Rault, R’emi Louf, Morgan Funtow-
icz, and Jamie Brew. 2019.
Huggingface’s trans-
formers: State-of-the-art natural language process-
ing. ArXiv, abs/1910.03771.
Kelvin Xu, Jimmy Ba, Ryan Kiros, Kyunghyun Cho,
Aaron Courville, Ruslan Salakhudinov, Rich Zemel,
and Yoshua Bengio. 2015.
Show, attend and tell:
Neural image caption generation with visual atten-
tion. In proceedings of International Conference on
Machine Learning, pages 2048–2057.

A
Appendices
A.1
Single Head Analysis
For analysing the attention weights, with multi-
head setup, we could either analyze attention heads
separately, or we could average all heads and have a
single attention graph. However, we should be care-
ful that treating attention heads separately could
potentially mean that we are assuming there is no
mixing of information between heads, which is not
true as we combine information of heads in the
position-wise feed-forward network on top of self-
attention in a transformer block. It is possible to
analyse the role of each head in isolation of all other
heads using attention rollout and attention ﬂow. To
not make the assumption that there is no mixing
of information between heads, for computing the
“input attention”, we will treat all the layers below
the layer of interest as single head layers, i.e., we
sum the attentions of all heads in the layers below.
For example, we can compute attention rollout for
head k at layer i as ˜A(i, k) = A(i, k) ¯A(i), where,
¯A(i) is attention rollout computed for layer i with
the single head assumption.

