URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2202.01602
Type: PDF
Length: 116108 chars (truncated)

--- Content ---

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
The Disagreement Problem in Explainable Machine Learning:
A Practitioner’s Perspective
Satyapriya Krishna‹
skrishna@g.harvard.edu
Harvard University
Tessa Han‹
than@g.harvard.edu
Harvard University
Alex Gu
gua@mit.edu
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Steven Wu
zstevenwu@cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University
Shahin Jabbari
shahin@drexel.edu
Drexel University
Himabindu Lakkaraju
hlakkaraju@hbs.edu
Harvard University
‹ These authors contributed equally to this work.
Reviewed on OpenReview: https://openreview.net/forum?id=jESY2WTZCe
Abstract
As various post hoc explanation methods are increasingly being leveraged to explain complex
models in high-stakes settings, it becomes critical to develop a deeper understanding of if
and when the explanations output by these methods disagree with each other, and how such
disagreements are resolved in practice. However, there is little to no research that provides
answers to these critical questions. In this work, we introduce and study the disagreement
problem in explainable machine learning. More specifically, we formalize the notion of
disagreement between explanations, analyze how often such disagreements occur in practice,
and how practitioners resolve these disagreements. We first conduct interviews with data
scientists to understand what constitutes disagreement between explanations generated by
different methods for the same model prediction and introduce a novel quantitative framework
to formalize this understanding. We then leverage this framework to carry out a rigorous
empirical analysis with four real-world datasets, six state-of-the-art post hoc explanation
methods, and six different predictive models, to measure the extent of disagreement between
the explanations generated by various popular explanation methods. In addition, we carry out
an online user study with data scientists to understand how they resolve the aforementioned
disagreements. Our results indicate that (1) state-of-the-art explanation methods often
disagree in terms of the explanations they output, and (2) machine learning practitioners
often employ ad hoc heuristics when resolving such disagreements. These findings suggest
that practitioners may be relying on misleading explanations when making consequential
decisions. They also underscore the importance of developing principled frameworks for
effectively evaluating and comparing explanations output by various explanation techniques.
1
arXiv:2202.01602v6  [cs.LG]  17 Apr 2025

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
1
Introduction
As machine learning (ML) models become integral in high-stakes domains like healthcare and finance,
the interpretability of these models is crucial for ML practitioners and domain experts (e.g., doctors and
policymakers).
Understanding model behavior is essential to identify errors and biases and gauge the
reliability of model predictions, especially in complex models (Doshi-Velez & Kim, 2017). Several post
hoc explanation methods have been proposed such as perturbation-based methods (e.g., LIME (Ribeiro
et al., 2016b), SHAP (Lundberg & Lee, 2017)) and gradient-based methods (e.g., Gradient times Input
(Simonyan et al., 2014), SmoothGrad (Smilkov et al., 2017), Integrated Gradients (Sundararajan et al., 2017),
GradCAM (Selvaraju et al., 2017)).
Prior research has investigated various aspects of explanation methods. For example, metrics have been
developed to assess the faithfulness of explanations to the model’s behavior, such as comparing them to a
model’s ground truth feature importances or using the "Remove and Retrain" (ROAR) approach (Liu et al.,
2021; Hooker et al., 2018). However, challenges arise due to the unavailability of ground truth in real-world
applications and the impracticality of retraining models in certain settings (Zhou et al., 2021). Studies have
shown that popular explanation methods can produce inconsistent or misleading explanations, leading to
risks like deploying biased models or making erroneous clinical decisions (Aivodji et al., 2019; Slack et al.,
2020).
However, while prior research has studied explanation methods, the (dis)agreement among different methods
has not been extensively investigated. Practitioners often use multiple methods, but these can yield conflicting
explanations. Therefore, resolving these disagreements is crucial to avoid reliance on misleading explanations
with potentially severe consequences (Slack et al., 2020). Yet, there is a lack of research on the extent to
which explanations disagree and how practitioners resolve these disagreements.
In this work, we formalize and investigate the disagreement problem in explainable ML, a novel area of research
that examines conflicts among post hoc explanation methods. We present the following key contributions:
1. We conduct semi-structured interviews with 25 data scientists, gaining insights on the nature and
frequency of explanation disagreements in their workflows. This input helps us define what constitutes
an explanation disagreement in practical scenarios. 1.
2. Building on these insights, we formalize the concept of explanation disagreement and create a new
evaluation framework to quantitatively assess disagreements between pairs of explanations for the
same model prediction.
3. We apply this framework in an extensive empirical analysis, measuring disagreement levels across four
real-world datasets, three data modalities, six advanced explanation methods, and various predictive
models, including logistic regression, tree-based models, and various neural networks.
4. Finally, we conduct an online user study with another set of 25 data scientists. We present them
with pairs of conflicting explanations, assessing which they would rely on and their rationale. We
also gather insights on their strategies for resolving such disagreements in their daily work.
Our findings reveal that explanation disagreements are common and problematic: 84% of interviewees
reported encountering explanation disagreements in practice. Our empirical analysis confirms widespread
discrepancies across different methods and data modalities (tabular, text, and image). Moreover, 86% of
our online user study participants admitted to using ad hoc heuristics or being uncertain about resolving
explanation disagreements. This highlights the need for better evaluation metrics and enhanced practitioner
understanding of the underlying principles of explanation methods.
2
Related Work
Our work is grounded in the extensive literature on explainable ML, which we discuss in this section.
1All the user interviews and studies in this work were approved by our institution’s IRB.
2

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
Inherently Interpretable Models and Post Hoc Explanations. A variety of approaches have been
developed to learn inherently interpretable models for tasks such as classification and clustering (Letham
et al., 2015; Lakkaraju et al., 2016; Bien & Tibshirani, 2009; Kim et al., 2014; Lou et al., 2012; Caruana
et al., 2015). However, complex models like deep neural networks often outperform these simpler models in
terms of accuracy (Ribeiro et al., 2016b). This has led to significant interest in post hoc explanation methods,
which aim to understand the behavior of these complex models by approximating them using simpler models
in a post hoc fashion. Post hoc explanation methods can be categorized into local explanation methods
and global explanation methods. Local explanation methods, including LIME, SHAP, SmoothGrad, and
Integrated Gradients (Ribeiro et al., 2016a; Lundberg & Lee, 2017; Sundararajan et al., 2017; Smilkov et al.,
2017) focus on explaining individual model predictions.
Global explanation methods, on the other hand, aim to summarize the behavior of complex models as a
whole (Bastani et al., 2017; Lakkaraju et al., 2019). Our work is focused on analyzing the disagreements
among explanations generated by the aforementioned local post hoc explanation methods.
Analyzing and Evaluating Post hoc Explanations. Prior research has proposed several notions of
explanation quality, such as faithfulness, stability, consistency, and sparsity (Liu et al., 2021; Petsiuk et al.,
2018; Slack et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2021). Metrics have also been proposed to quantify these aspects of
explanation quality (Zhou et al., 2021; Carvalho et al., 2019; Gilpin et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2021). These
properties and metrics have been leveraged to theoretically and empirically analyze the behavior of popular
post hoc explanations (Ghorbani et al., 2019; Slack et al., 2020; Dombrowski et al., 2019; Adebayo et al.,
2018; Alvarez-Melis & Jaakkola, 2018; Levine et al., 2019; Chalasani et al., 2020; Agarwal et al., 2021).
The work that is closest to ours is the research by Neely et al. (2021) which demonstrates that certain
post hoc explanation methods (e.g., LIME, Integrated Gradients, DeepLIFT, Grad-SHAP, Deep-SHAP,
and attention-based explanations) disagree with each other based on rank correlation (Kendall’s τ) metric.
However, their work neither formalizes the notion of explanation disagreement by leveraging practitioner
inputs nor studies how explanation disagreements are resolved in practice, which are the key contributions of
this work. This research has also inspired subsequent works that delve deeper into this topic (Han et al., 2022;
Banegas-Luna et al., 2023). For instance, Han et al. (2022) built on this work and theoretically analyzed
multiple state-of-the-art explanation methods to understand the reasons behind their disagreements.
Human Factors in Explainability. Many user studies have been conducted to evaluate how well humans
can understand and use explanations (Doshi-Velez & Kim, 2017). Some of these studies have shown that data
scientists often struggle to understand and effectively leverage state-of-the-art explanation techniques (Kaur
et al., 2020). Others have identified a variety of stakeholders across the model life cycle and highlighted the
core goals of model explanations (Hong et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2022). Prior works have also examined
whether explanations help users in performing specific tasks (Buçinca et al., 2021; Bansal et al., 2021; Fan
et al., 2022; Sperrle et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022; Vasconcelos et al., 2023; Fok & Weld, 2023). However,
none of these works focus on understanding the disagreement problem, the extent to which practitioners face
it, and/or how they resolve it.
3
Understanding and Measuring Disagreement Between Model Explanations
In this section, we discuss practitioner perspectives on what constitutes disagreement between two explanations
and then formalize the notion of explanation disagreement. To this end, we first describe the study that we
carry out with data scientists to understand what constitutes explanation disagreement, and the extent to
which they encounter this problem in practice. We then discuss the insights from this study and leverage
these insights to propose a novel framework that can quantitatively measure the disagreement between any
two explanations.
3.1
Characterizing Explanation Disagreement Using Practitioner Inputs
Here, we describe the interviews we conducted with data scientists to characterize explanation disagreement
and outline findings and insights from these interviews.
3

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
3.1.1
Interviews with Data Scientists
We conducted 30-minute semi-structured interviews with 25 data scientists who employ explainability
techniques to understand model behavior and explain it to their customers and managers. We recruited these
participants by emailing the explainable machine learning groups (and relevant mailing lists) in three different
for-profit companies in the technology and financial services sectors across the United States. We conducted
basic checks (e.g., pre-screening interviews and profile checks) to ensure that each recruited participant has
at least one year of experience as a data scientist, and has working knowledge of data science and machine
learning.
Furthermore, all of these data scientists used state-of-the-art local post hoc explanation methods (e.g., LIME,
SHAP, and gradient-based methods) in their day-to-day workflow. 19 participants (76%) were male, and 6
(24%) were female. 16 participants (64%) had more than 2 years of experience working with explainability
techniques, and the remaining 9 (36%) had about 8 to 12 months of experience. Our interviews included,
but were not limited to the following questions: Q1) How often do you use multiple explanation methods to
understand the same model prediction? Q2) What constitutes disagreement between two explanations that
explain the same model prediction? Q3) How often do you encounter disagreements between explanations
output by different methods for the same model prediction?
3.1.2
Findings and Insights
The interviews revealed how data scientists use explanation methods and their perspectives on what constitutes
disagreement among explanations. 22 out of the 25 participants (88%) said that they almost always use
multiple explanation methods to understand the same model prediction. Furthermore, 21 out of the 25
participants (84%) mentioned that they have often run into some form of disagreement between explanations
generated by different methods for the same prediction. We found that data scientists consider explanations
to disagree when:
Top features are different:
Most popular post hoc explanation methods return feature importance values
for each feature. These values indicate which features contribute most (either positively or negatively) to the
prediction, i.e., top features. 21 out of the 25 participants (84%) mentioned that such a set of top features is
"the most critical piece of information" that they rely on in their day-to-day workflow. They also noted that
they typically look at the top 5 to 10 features provided by an explanation for each prediction. When two
explanations have different sets of top features, they consider it to be a disagreement.
Ordering among top features is different:
18 out of 25 participants (72%) indicated that they also
consider the ordering among the top features very carefully in their workflow. Therefore, they consider a
mismatch in the ordering of the top features provided by two different explanations to be a disagreement.
Direction of top feature contributions is different:
19 out of 25 participants (76%) mentioned that the
sign or direction of the feature contribution (i.e., whether the feature contributes positively or negatively to
the prediction) is another critical piece of information. Any mismatch in the signs of the top features between
two explanations is a sign of disagreement. As one participant remarked: "I saw an explanation indicating
that a top feature bankruptcy contributes positively to a particular loan denial, and another explanation saying
that it contributes negatively. That is a clear disagreement. The model prediction can be trusted with the
former explanation, but not with the latter.".
Relative ordering of features of interest is different:
16 of our study participants (64%) indicated that
they also look at relative ordering between certain features of interest, and that, they consider explanations
to disagree if explanations provide contradicting information about this aspect. As one participant remarked:
"I often check if salary is more important than credit score in loan approvals. If one explanation says salary
is more important than credit score, and another says credit score is more important than salary; then it is a
disagreement."
4

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
A striking finding from our study is that participants characterize explanation disagreement based on factors
such as mismatch in top features, feature ordering, directions of feature contributions, and relative feature
ordering, but not on the feature importance values output by different explanation methods. 24 out of 25
participants (96%) opine that feature importance values output by different explanation methods are not
directly comparable. For example, they note that while LIME outputs coefficients of a linear model as feature
importance values, SHAP outputs Shapley values as feature attributions which sum to the probability of
the predicted class. Thus, data scientists do not try to base explanation disagreement on these numbers not
being equal or similar. One of our participants succinctly summarized practitioners’ perspectives on this
explanation disagreement problem: "The values generated by different explanation methods are different. So,
I would not characterize disagreement based on that. But, I would at least want the explanations they output
to give me consistent insights. The explanations should agree on what are the most important features, the
ordering among them, and so on for me to derive consistent insights. But, they don’t!"
3.2
Formalizing the Notion of Explanation Disagreement
Our study indicates that ML practitioners consider the following key aspects when they think about
explanation disagreement: a) the extent to which explanations differ in the top-k features, the signs of these
top-k features, and the ordering of these top-k features, and b) the extent to which explanations differ in the
relative ordering of certain features of interest. To capture these intuitions about explanation disagreement,
we propose six different metrics: feature agreement, rank agreement, sign agreement, signed rank agreement,
rank correlation, and pairwise rank agreement. The first four metrics capture disagreement with respect to the
top-k features of the explanations and the last two metrics capture disagreement with respect to a selected
set of features that could be provided as input by an end user. For all six metrics, lower values indicate
stronger disagreement. See Section A for formal definitions.
3.2.1
Measuring Disagreement With Respect to Top-k Features
We now define four metrics, which capture specific aspects of explanation disagreement with respect to the
top-k features.2
Feature Agreement:
ML practitioners in interviews (Section 3.1) indicated that a key notion of
disagreement between a pair of explanations is that they output different top-k features. To capture this
notion, feature agreement computes the fraction of common features between the sets of top-k features of the
two explanations.
Rank Agreement:
Practitioners also indicated that if the ordering of the top-k features is different for
two explanations (even if the feature sets are the same), then they consider it to be a disagreement. To
capture this notion, rank agreement computes the fraction of features that are not only common between
the sets of top-k features of two explanations, but also have the same position in the respective rank orders.
Rank agreement is a stricter metric than feature agreement since it also considers the ordering of the top-k
features. While the practitioners we interviewed favored the aforementioned definition of the rank agreement
metric, one could also imagine a less strict variant that accounts for the differences between the ranks of the
top-k features in the two explanations. Such a weighted rank agreement metric would quantify the degree of
agreement based on how far apart the top-k features are, rather than only considering an exact match of
their ranks. This implies that even if certain features are not in the same position, their relative closeness
still contributes positively to the overall agreement score, making it a softer variant of the rank agreement
defined above. See Section D.2 for more details on weighted rank agreement and additional disagreement
metrics that we explored.
Sign Agreement:
In our study, practitioners also mentioned that they consider two explanations to
disagree if the feature attribution signs (i.e. directions of feature contribution) do not align for the top-k
features. To capture this notion, sign agreement computes the fraction of features that are not only common
2The top-k features of an explanation are typically computed only based on the magnitude of the feature importance values
and not the signs.
5

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
between the sets of top-k features of two explanations, but also share the same sign in both explanations.
Sign agreement is a stricter metric than feature agreement since it also considers signs of the top-k features.
Signed Rank Agreement:
This metric fuses the above three notions of explanation disagreement
and computes the fraction of features that are not only common between the sets of top-k features of two
explanations but also share the same feature attribution sign and rank in both explanations. The signed rank
agreement is the strictest compared to all the aforementioned metrics since it considers both the ordering
and the signs of the top-k features.
3.2.2
Measuring Disagreement With Respect to Features of Interest
Practitioners also indicated that they consider two explanations to be different if the relative ordering of
features of interest (e.g., salary and credit score discussed in Section 3.1) differ between the explanations.
These features could be provided as input by an end user (such as a data scientist). To formalize this notion,
we introduce the two metrics below.
Rank Correlation:
In practice, this selected set of features corresponds to features that are of interest to
end users and can be provided as input by end users. Rank correlation computes Spearman’s rank correlation
coefficient between feature rankings provided by two explanations for these selected sets of features.
Pairwise Rank Agreement:
The pairwise rank agreement takes as input a set of features that are of
interest to the user and computes the fraction of feature pairs for which the relative ordering is the same
between two explanations.
4
Empirical Analysis of Explanation Disagreement
We leverage the metrics outlined in Section 3 and carry out a comprehensive empirical analysis with six
state-of-the-art explanation methods and four real-world datasets spanning three data modalities to study
the explanation disagreement problem. In this section, we describe the datasets, experimental setup, and key
findings.
4.1
Datasets
To carry out our empirical analysis, we use four datasets spanning three data modalities (tabular, text,
and image). For tabular data, we use the Correctional Offender Management Profiling for Alternative
Sanctions (COMPAS) ProPublica and German Credit datasets Repository. The COMPAS dataset comprises
seven features on the demographics, criminal history, and prison time of 4,937 defendants. Each defendant
is classified as either low or high risk for recidivism based on the COMPAS algorithm’s risk score. The
German Credit dataset contains twenty features on the demographics, credit history, bank account balance,
loan information, and employment information of 1,000 loan applicants. Each applicant is classified as
either low or high risk for defaulting on a loan. For text data, we use Antonio Gulli (AG)’s corpus of news
articles (AG_News) ag (2005). It contains 127,600 sentences (collected from 1,000,000+ articles from 2,000+
sources with a vocabulary size of 95,000+ words). The class label is the topic of the article from which
a sentence was obtained (World, Sports, Business, or Science/Technology). For image data, we use the
ImageNet´1k Russakovsky et al. (2015); ima (2015) object recognition dataset. It contains 1,381,167 images
belonging to 1000 categories. We obtain segmentation maps from PASCAL VOC 2012 voc (2012) that are
directly used as super-pixels for the explanation methods.
4.2
Experimental Setup
We train a variety of black box models. For tabular data, we train four models: logistic regression, densely
connected feed-forward neural network, random forest, and gradient-boosted tree. For text data, we train a
widely-used vanilla LSTM-based text classifier on AG_News Zhang et al. (2015) corpus. For image data, we
use the pre-trained ResNet-18 He et al. (2016) for ImageNet.
6

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
Next, we apply six state-of-the-art post hoc explanation methods to explain the black box models’ predictions
for a set of test data points.3 We apply two perturbation-based explanation methods (LIME Ribeiro et al.
(2016b) and KernelShap Lundberg & Lee (2017)), and four gradient-based explanation methods (Vanilla
Gradient Simonyan et al. (2014), Gradient times Input Shrikumar et al. (2017), Integrated Gradients Sun-
dararajan et al. (2017), and SmoothGrad Smilkov et al. (2017)). For explanation methods with a sample size
hyper-parameter, we either run the explanation method to convergence (i.e., select a sample size such that an
increase in the number of samples does not significantly change the explanations) or use a sample size that is
much higher than the sample size recommended by previous work.
We then evaluate the (dis)agreement between the explanation methods using the metrics described in
Section 3.2. For tabular and text data, we apply rank correlation and pairwise rank agreement across
all features; and feature agreement, rank agreement, sign agreement, and signed rank agreement across
top-k features for varying values of k. For image data, metrics that operate on the top-k features are more
applicable to super-pixels. Thus, we apply the six disagreement metrics on explanations output by LIME
and KernelSHAP (which leverage superpixels), and calculate rank correlation (across all pixels as features)
between the explanations output by gradient-based methods. Additional details are described in Appendix B.
4.3
Results and Insights
We discuss the results of our empirical analysis for each of the three data modalities.
4.3.1
Tabular Data
Figure 1 shows the disagreement between various pairs of explanation methods for the neural network model
trained on the COMPAS dataset. We computed the six metrics outlined in Section 3.2 using k “ 5 (out
of 7 features) for metrics that focus on top-k features. Each cell in the heatmap shows the metric value
averaged over the test data points for each pair of explanation methods with lighter colors indicating stronger
disagreement. We see that explanation methods tend to exhibit slightly higher values on pairwise rank
agreement and feature agreement metrics, and relatively lower values on other metrics (indicating stronger
disagreement).
We next study the effect of the number of top features on the degree of disagreement. Figure 2 shows the
disagreement of explanation methods for the neural network model trained on the COMPAS dataset. We
computed the rank agreement (top row) and signed rank agreement (bottom row) at top-k features for
increasing values of k. We see that as the number of top-k features increases, rank agreement and signed rank
agreement decrease. This indicates that, as k increases, top-k features of a pair of explanation methods are
less likely to contain shared features with the same rank (as measured by rank agreement) or shared features
with the same rank and sign (as measured by signed rank agreement). These patterns are consistent across
other models trained on the COMPAS dataset. See Appendix C.1.
In addition, across metrics, values of k, and models, the specific explanation method pairs of Vanilla Gradient-
SmoothGrad and Gradient times Input-Integrated Gradients exhibit strong agreement while the pairs of
Vanilla Gradient-Integrated Gradients, Vanilla Gradient-Gradient times Input, SmoothGrad-Gradient times
Input and SmoothGrad-Integrated Gradients consistently exhibit stronger disagreement. These results
are consistent with the theoretical findings indicating that certain pairs of explanation methods are more
consistent with one another than other pairs Han et al. (2022).
Furthermore, there are varying degrees of disagreement among pairs of explanation methods. For example,
for the neural network model trained on the COMPAS dataset, rank correlation displays a wide range of
values across explanation method pairs, with 14 out of 15 explanation method pairs even exhibiting negative
rank correlation when explaining multiple data points. This is shown in the left panel of Figure 3, which
displays the rank correlation over all the features among all pairs of explanation methods for the neural
network model trained on the COMPAS dataset.
3We also studied another explanation method called L2X Chen et al. (2018). See Section D.1 for more details.
7

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
Figure 1: Disagreement between explanation methods for neural network model trained on COMPAS dataset
measured by six metrics: rank correlation and pairwise rank agreement across all features, and feature, rank,
sign, and signed rank agreement across top k “ 5 features. Heatmaps show the average metric value over
the test set data points for each pair of explanation methods, with lower values (lighter colors) indicating
stronger disagreement. The disagreement between a pair of explanations is considered non-trivial if less than
75% of the features agree (i.e., if feature agreement, rank agreement, sign agreement, signed rank agreement,
or pairwise rank agreement is less than 0.75), or if the correlation among features is only moderately positive,
nonexistent, or negative (i.e. if the rank correlation is less than 0.50). Across all six heatmaps, the standard
error ranges between 0 and 0.01.
All the patterns discussed above are also generally reflected in the German Credit dataset (Appendix C.1).
However, explanation methods sometimes display stronger disagreement for the German Credit dataset than
for the COMPAS dataset. For example, rank agreement and signed rank agreement are lower for the German
Credit dataset than for the COMPAS dataset at the top 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100% of features for both
logistic regression and neural network models. One possible reason is that the German Credit dataset has a
larger set of features than the COMPAS dataset, resulting in a larger number of possible ranking and sign
combinations assigned by a given explanation method and making it less likely for two explanation methods
to produce consistent explanations.
Morever, explanation methods display trends associated with model complexity. For example, the disagreement
between explanation methods is similar or stronger for the neural network model than for the logistic regression
model across metrics and values of k, for both COMPAS and German Credit datasets (Appendix C.1). In
addition, explanation methods show similar levels of disagreement for the random forest and gradient-boosted
tree models. These trends suggest that disagreement among explanation methods may increase with model
complexity. As the complexity of the black box model increases, it may be more difficult to accurately
approximate the black box model with a simpler model (LIME’s strategy, for example) and more difficult to
disentangle the contribution of each feature to the model’s prediction. Thus, the higher the model complexity,
the more difficult it may be for different explanation methods to generate the true explanation and the
8

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
Figure 2: Disagreement between explanation methods for neural network model trained on COMPAS dataset
measured by rank agreement (top row) and signed rank agreement (bottom row) at top-k features for
increasing values of k. Each cell in the heatmap shows the metric value averaged over test set data points for
each pair of explanation methods, with lower values (lighter colors) indicating stronger disagreement. We
follow the same disagreement interpretation described in Figure 1. Across all six heatmaps, the standard
error ranges between 0 and 0.01.
more likely it may be for different explanation methods to generate differently false explanations, leading to
stronger disagreement among explanation methods. Finally, we also study the effect of dataset complexity
(i.e., the number of features) on the degree of disagreement for each of our metrics. See Section D.3 for more
details.
Figure 3: Distribution of rank correlation over all features for neural network model trained on COMPAS
(left), and rank correlation across all features (middle) and signed rank agreement across top-11 features
(right) for neural network model trained on AG_News.
9

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
4.3.2
Text Data
Figure 4: Disagreement between explanation methods for LSTM trained on the AG_News dataset using
k “ 11 features for metrics operating on top-k features, and all features for other metrics. Each heatmap
shows the metric value averaged over test data for each pair of explanation methods. Lighter colors indicate
more disagreement. Standard error ranges from 0.0 to 0.0025 for all six metrics.
In the case of text data, we deal with a high-dimensional feature space where words are features. We plot
the six metrics for k “ 11 which is around 25% of the average text length of a sentence (data point) in the
dataset (Figure 4). As seen in the figure, we observe severe disagreements across all the six disagreement
metrics. Rank agreement and signed rank agreement are the lowest between explanations with values under
0.1 for most cases indicating disagreement in over 90% of the top-k features. Trends are quite similar for
rank correlation and feature agreement with better agreement between gradient-based explanation methods,
such as a feature agreement of 0.61 for the Gradient times Input and Vanilla Gradient method pair.
In addition to the broader disagreements between various explanation methods, we notice specific patterns
of agreement between certain explanation methods. Based on the middle and right panels of Figure 3, we
observe a higher rank correlation between different pairs of gradient-based explanations. We also observe from
Figure 4 that LIME exhibits higher agreement with other explanation methods compared to KernelSHAP
(e.g., Figure 4 shows that the average rank correlation between LIME and all other explanation methods is
0.273, as opposed to 0.113 in case of KernelSHAP). This finding is consistent with the insights we observed
in the case of the COMPAS dataset (Figure 1, top left panel). Lastly, we notice a higher disagreement among
explanation methods for text data than for tabular data.
4.3.3
Image Data
While LIME and KernelSHAP consider superpixels of images as features, gradient-based methods consider
pixels as features. In addition, the notion of top-k features and the metrics we define on top-k features are
not semantically meaningful when we consider pixels as features. We compute all six metrics to capture
disagreement between explanations output by LIME and KernelSHAP with superpixels as features. We also
10

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
compute rank correlation on all the pixels (features) to capture disagreement between explanations output by
gradient-based methods.
Unlike earlier trends with tabular and text data, we see higher agreement between KernelSHAP and LIME
on all six metrics: rank correlation of 0.8977, pairwise rank agreement of 0.9302, feature agreement of 0.9535,
rank agreement of 0.8478, sign agreement of 0.9218 and signed rank agreement of 0.8193.
However, the trends are quite the opposite when we compute rank correlation at pixel-level for gradient-based
methods (See Appendix C). For instance, the rank correlation between Integrated Gradients and SmoothGrad
is 0.001, indicating strong disagreement. The disagreement is similarly quite strong in the case of other pairs
of gradient-based methods. This suggests that disagreement could potentially vary significantly based on the
granularity of image representation.
Remark 1. Throughout this section, we carried out a comprehensive empirical analysis with six explanation
methods and four real-world datasets spanning three data modalities to study the disagreement problem. While
our results generally show a moderate to high degree of disagreement among all pairs of explanations across
all data modalities, we observe that the extent of disagreement is slightly lower when we consider variants of
the proposed metrics. For example, we explored additional metrics such as weighted rank agreement, top-k
pairwise rank agreement, and top-k rank correlation and we discuss these metrics and corresponding results
in Appendix D.2.
5
Resolving the Disagreement Problem in Practice: A Qualitative Study
After establishing the fact that the majority of practitioners observe disagreement between explanations
using both qualitative analysis (Section 3) as well as quantitative analysis (Section 4), we try to understand
the different ways practitioners tackle this disagreement. To this end, we conduct a qualitative user study
targeted towards explainability practitioners. We next describe our user study design and discuss our findings.
5.1
User Study Design
In total, 25 participants participated in our study, 13 from academia and 12 from industry. Participants from
academia were graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. In contrast, participants from industry were
data scientists and ML engineers from three different for-profit companies in the technology and financial
services sectors across the United States. We recruited these participants by emailing the explainable ML
groups (and relevant mailing lists) within these organizations. 12 participants in this study (48%) also
participated in the interviews in Section 3.1.4 We conducted basic checks (e.g., pre-screening interviews and
profile checks) to ensure that each recruited participant has at least one year of experience as a data scientist,
and has working knowledge of data science and ML. 20 of these participants indicated that they had used
explanation methods in their work in various ways, including doing research, helping clients explain their
models, and debugging their own models. Following the setup in Section 4, we asked participants to compare
the output of five pairs of explanation methods on the predictions made by the neural network we trained on
the COMPAS dataset. We chose the COMPAS dataset because it only has 7 features, making it easy for
participants to understand the explanations.
First, the participants are shown an information page explaining the COMPAS risk score binary prediction
setting and various explanation methods. We indicate that we trained a neural network to predict the
COMPAS risk score (low or high) from the seven COMPAS features. We also give a brief description of each
of these seven features to participants and tell them to assume that the criminal defendant’s risk of recidivism
is correctly predicted to be high risk. In this information page, we also briefly introduce and summarize the
six explanation methods we use in the study (LIME, KernelSHAP, Vanilla Gradient, Gradient times Input,
SmoothGrad, and Integrated Gradients). Finally, we provide links to the papers describing each method. We
include a screenshot of this information page in Appendix E.1.
Next, participants were shown a series of 5 prompts, a sample of which is shown in Figure 5. Each prompt
presented two explanations of the neural network model’s prediction corresponding to a particular data
4The remaining 13 participants from the interviews were unavailable during the time of the second study.
11

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
point generated using two different explanation methods (e.g., LIME and KernelSHAP in Figure 5). The
explanations (and data points) within these prompts were selected to ensure high disagreement between them
as per the metrics discussed in prior sections. We displayed the full set of k “ 7 COMPAS features, showing
the feature importance of each feature. The red and blue bars indicate that the feature contributes negatively
and positively, respectively, to the model prediction. Participants were first asked the question “To what
extent do you think the two explanations shown above agree or disagree with each other?” and given four
choices: completely agree, mostly agree, mostly disagree, and completely disagree. If the participants indicated
any level of disagreement (i.e., any of the latter 3 choices), we then asked them “Since you believe that the
above explanations disagree (to some extent), which explanation would you rely on?” and presented them
with three choices: the two explanation methods shown and “it depends”. Then, they were asked to explain
their response. Participants were allowed to take as much time as they needed.
Figure 5: The user interface for a prompt. The user is shown two explanations for a COMPAS data point,
showing the feature importance value of each of the 7 features. Red and blue indicate negative and positive
feature values, respectively. See the text for more details.
5.2
Results and Insights
We now discuss the results and findings from our user study.
5.2.1
Do practitioners observe disagreements?
We aggregated the responses to the first question in each prompt, “To what extent do you think the explanations
shown above agree or disagree with each other?”. Overall, 4%, 28%, 50%, and 18% of responses indicate
completely agree, mostly agree, mostly disagree, and completely disagree, respectively, highlighting that there
is significant disagreement among our prompts. See Appendix E.4 for more details.
5.2.2
Are certain explanations favored over others?
Next, since different explanation methods have different levels of popularity, we analyze if certain methods
are chosen more often in disagreements. Figure 6a shows the distribution of how participants resolved
disagreements for each prompt (dropping prompts with 4 or fewer responses). We first emphasize that there
is high variability in how participants chose to resolve disagreements, showing a lack of consensus for the
12

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
majority of prompts. However, when participants do decide to choose a method rather than abstaining, they
often choose the same method. For example, for the Vanilla Gradient vs. SmoothGrad pair (top row in
Figure 6a), participants either chose SmoothGrad over Vanilla Gradient or chose neither. We also aggregate
these choices’ overall prompts, and in Figure 6b, we plot how often each of the six explanation methods is
chosen, finding that indeed, certain methods were favored over others. While KernelSHAP was chosen 66.7%
of the time when there were disagreements, Gradient times Input was only chosen 7.0% of the time. We
include a further explanation of why participants chose each of the explanations in Appendix E.5, including
quotes from participants that supported each method.
(a) The frequency with which each of the explanations in a pair is
selected upon disagreement. The blue, gold, and grey bars show the
percentage of participants (X-axis) that picked the left, right, and
neither method when presented with the pair of methods shown
on the Y-axis.
(b) The frequency with which each of the expla-
nations was chosen when there is a disagreement.
X-axis indicates the explanation method and Y-
axis indicates the frequency.
Figure 6: Figures highlight which methods participants chose when the explanations they were shown
disagreed. In (a), we show how participants resolved each particular prompt. In (b), we show the overall
frequencies with which an explanation method was selected.
5.2.3
How do practitioners resolve disagreements?
Across all six explanation methods, we find three unifying themes that dictated why participants chose one
explanation over the other. We give a high-level description of these themes below, highlighting direct quotes
from participants in Table 1.
1. One method is inherently better than the other because of its associated theory or publication time (33%):
Participants often indicated preference towards a particular method without referencing the shown explanation
citing features such as the paper’s publication time (more recent is better), the theory behind the method,
and the method’s stability.
2. One of the generated explanations matches intuition better (32%):
Participants frequently said that one
method’s explanation aligned with their intuition better, citing the absolute and relative values of specific
features as evidence.
3. LIME and SHAP are better because the COMPAS dataset comprises tabular data (23%):
Participants
said that they mainly used LIME and SHAP for tabular data and commonly cited this as their sole reason.
5.2.4
Experiencing and resolving disagreements in day-to-day workflow
After answering all 5 prompts, participants were asked a set of questions on their experience with the
disagreement problem in their day-to-day work. First, to filter out participants who didn’t use explanation
methods, we asked: “Have you used explanation methods in your work before?”. Of the 25 participants, 5 of
them indicated that they had not. We asked the other 20 participants further questions to better understand
their experience with the disagreement problem. The full set of questions can also be found in Appendix
E.3. Having understood what participants look for to determine disagreement in Section 3.1, we next sought
to better understand two crucial questions related to the disagreement problem: (Q1): Do you observe
13

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
Theme Highlighted
Sample Quotes
1. One method’s
paper/theory suggests
that it’s inherently
better (33%).
• “I have no reason to believe the gradient holds anywhere other than
very locally.”
• “[Integrated Gradients is] more rigorous [than SmoothGrad] based on
the paper and axioms”
• “gradient explanations are more unstable”
2. One explanation
matches intuition
better (32%).
• “seems unlikely that all features contributed to a positive classification”
• “features such as priors_count and length of stay [are] important for
determining”
• “Gradient*Input only consider[s] sensitive features (age, race) as im-
pactful which could be a sign of a biased underlying data distribution”
3. LIME/SHAP are
better for tabular data
(23%).
• “I use LIME for structured data”
• “SHAP is more commonly used [than Vanilla Gradient] for tabular
data”
Table 1: Themes summarizing how participants decided between explanations when faced with disagreement
along with quotes.
disagreements between explanations output by state-of-the-art methods in your day-to-day workflow? and
(Q2): How do you resolve such disagreements in your day to day workflow?.
One of the 20 participants declined to respond to (Q1) and (Q2) because they were not a practitioner. Out
of the other 19, 14 participants (74%) responded “yes” to (Q1), indicating that they did in fact encounter
explanation disagreement in practice. Of the remaining 5 who said they did not, 3 said they had not really
paid attention to the issue. We also aimed to uncover how participants dealt with the disagreement problem
when it arose in practice (Q2). 14 participants responded affirmatively to (Q1), and their responses to (Q2)
can be grouped into 3 categories. 50% favored using ad-hoc heuristics based on personal preferences for
choosing which methods to use (“picking their favorite method”, “rules of thumb based on results in papers”).
These heuristics varied among participants and included ease of implementation, accompanying theoretical
results, recency of publication, ease of understanding, and documentation of packages. 36% did not indicate
any explicit way for resolving these disagreements but instead demonstrated confusion and uncertainty (“no
clear answer to me”). Several of these responses also indicated the desire for the research community to make
progress and help (“I hope research community can provide some guidance”). The remaining 14% proposed
to use other metrics such as fidelity (“try and use some metric to measure fidelity”). See Appendix E.7 for
more details including the breakdown of our results for participants in academia and industry.
6
Discussion and Conclusion
The main takeaway from our work is the observation that state-of-the-art explanation methods consistently
disagree with each other across various datasets and data modalities, as quantified by the metrics we outlined.
Our empirical estimates of explanation disagreement closely align with human assessments of disagreements
among leading explainable AI methods. Our focus was on highlighting the prevalence of disagreement within
the literature on explainable AI and examining how practitioners address these disagreements. To this end,
we also conducted extensive user studies (semi-structured interviews and an online user study) and empirical
analyses. Our semi-structured interviews with machine learning practitioners highlighted that 84% of them
regularly face explanation disagreements. While there exist metrics and frameworks to both evaluate and
compare explanations output by state-of-the-art methods (Agarwal et al., 2021; 2022; Han et al., 2022),
several practitioners (86% of respondents in our online user study) admitted to using ad hoc heuristics or
being uncertain about resolving explanation disagreements in practice. This highlights a critical gap between
research and practice in explainable machine learning.
In this work, we prioritized examining the prevalence of explanation disagreement rather than exploring
its underlying causes, given the complexity of this analysis. Nonetheless, subsequent research building
14

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (06/2024)
on our work has attempted to understand the sources of thes
