URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2401.07927
Type: PDF
Length: 177562 chars (truncated)

--- Content ---

Are self-explanations from Large Language Models faithful?
Andreas Madsen1,2
Sarath Chandar1,2,4
Siva Reddy1,3,5
1 Mila – Quebec AI Institute
2 Polytechnique Montréal
3 McGill University
4 Canada CIFAR AI Chair
5 Facebook CIFAR AI Chair
{firstname.lastname}@mila.quebec
Abstract
Instruction-tuned Large Language Models
(LLMs)
excel
at
many
tasks
and
will
even explain their reasoning, so-called self-
explanations. However, convincing and wrong
self-explanations can lead to unsupported confi-
dence in LLMs, thus increasing risk. Therefore,
it’s important to measure if self-explanations
truly reflect the model’s behavior. Such a mea-
sure is called interpretability-faithfulness and is
challenging to perform since the ground truth
is inaccessible, and many LLMs only have an
inference API. To address this, we propose
employing self-consistency checks to measure
faithfulness. For example, if an LLM says a
set of words is important for making a predic-
tion, then it should not be able to make its
prediction without these words. While self-
consistency checks are a common approach to
faithfulness, they have not previously been suc-
cessfully applied to LLM self-explanations for
counterfactual, feature attribution, and redac-
tion explanations. Our results demonstrate that
faithfulness is explanation, model, and task-
dependent, showing self-explanations should
not be trusted in general. For example, with sen-
timent classification, counterfactuals are more
faithful for Llama2, feature attribution for Mis-
tral, and redaction for Falcon 40B.
1
Introduction
Instruction-tuned large language models (LLMs),
such as Llama2 (Touvron et al., 2023), Falcon
(Penedo et al., 2023), Mistral (Jiang et al., 2023), or
GPT4 (OpenAI, 2023), are increasingly becoming
mainstream among the general population, due to
their capabilities and availability.
Instruction-tuned LLMs can even provide very
convincing explanations for their utterances and
will often do so unprompted. Because LLMs pro-
duce these explanations themselves and they pro-
vide justification for their own behavior, we term
them self-explanations. Importantly, one may also
judge the ethicality of models not just based on
Session 1 (prediction and explanation)
Is the following candidate a good fit for a
Senior SWE position? Answer only yes/no.
Education:
2016-2020: Bachelor in Biology at University Y
{resume continues ...}
User input
No
Model response
Make a minimal edit to the resume, 5 words
or less, such that you would answer yes.
Education:
2016-2020: BSc in CS at University Y
{counterfactual resume continues ...}
Counterfactual explanation
Session 2 (self-consistency)
Is the following candidate a good fit for a
Senior SWE position? Answer only yes/no.
{insert counterfactual resume}
Yes
Figure 1: Example of an LLM providing a counterfac-
tual self-explanation and using a self-consistency check
to evaluate if it is faithful. – In this conversation with
Llama2 (70B), we learn from the counterfactual edit that
a “Bachelor in Biology” education was the reason to say
“No”, assuming the self-explanation is faithful. Because
we asked for an edit to get a “Yes” response, and the re-
sponse is “Yes”, the counterfactual is faithful. Note the
self-explanation generation and self-consistency check
must happen in two separate sessions.
their predictions but also on their self-explanations.
However, it’s also well established that LLMs hal-
lucinate (Bang et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2023). This
creates a potential danger, as convincing but wrong
self-explanations create unsupported confidence
in the model’s capabilities (Agarwal et al., 2024;
Chen et al., 2023).
arXiv:2401.07927v4  [cs.CL]  16 May 2024

Previous work on hallucination analysis has fo-
cused on a different kind of correctness, namely
if the explanations reflect true world-knowledge
(Bang et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2023; Rawte et al.,
2023; Lin et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2021). Although
important, such analysis can only be applied to self-
explanations about facts, not the model’s opinions.
It also doesn’t tell us if the self-explanations truly
reflect the model’s reasoning process, known as
interpretability-faithfulness (Jacovi and Goldberg,
2020; Doshi-Velez and Kim, 2017).
Interpretability-faithfulness is hard to measure
because the models are too complex for humans
to manually analyze, making the ground-truth in-
accessible (Jacovi and Goldberg, 2020). With self-
explanations, there is an additional challenge be-
cause of their free-formed nature, which makes
them hard to analyze (Parcalabescu and Frank,
2023). Additionally, many contemporary LLMs
only provide an inference API and often refuse to
make discrete predictions when critical information
is missing; these properties make previous faith-
fulness metrics that depend on confidence scores
impractical to apply (Huang et al., 2023).
To solve these challenges, we propose a faith-
fulness metric that only uses an inference API and
takes advantage of the model’s reluctance to answer
when critical information is missing. We achieve
this by limiting the scope of self-explanations to
those verifiable using self-consistency checks and
by carefully prompting the model regarding both
the explanation and classification generation.
A self-consistency check uses re-evaluation to
check if the explanation is consistent with the
model’s behavior. For example, consider a hiring
recommendation system. In 2018, Amazon found
that “Women’s chess club membership” was a neg-
ative signal while “chess club membership” was
a positive signal, indicating a harmful gender bias
(Kodiyan, 2019). Such a contrastive example is
known as a counterfactual. With LLMs, one can
ask the model itself to edit the resume such that
it would make the opposite prediction. We can
then learn about the model behavior by comparing
the two resumes, assuming the counterfactual is
faithful. To check faithfulness, we ask the model
for its hiring recommendation using the counter-
factual resume. If the recommendation changed,
as requested, it’s a faithful explanation. Figure 1
shows the workflow of prediction, explanation, and
self-consistency check.
In this paper, we evaluate the faithfulness of the
following types of self-explanations:
• Counterfactual explanations replace content, to
get the opposite prediction (Madsen et al., 2022b;
Miller, 2019). For example, replace “Women’s
chess club” with “Chess club”.
• Feature attribution explanations list the nec-
essary words for making a prediction, such that
without these words a prediction can not be made.
For example, 1) “Women” 2) “BSc degree”.
• Redaction explanations remove all relevant
words for making a prediction, such that a pre-
diction can no longer be made. For example,
“[REDACTED] chess club”.
We demonstrate our approach on four datasets
with varying tasks: sentiment classification (IMDB
Maas et al. 2011), multi-choice classification (bAbI
and MCTest Weston et al. 2016; Richardson et al.
2013), and two-paragraph classification (RTE Da-
gan et al. 2006). Additionally, we apply the ap-
proach to Llama2 (70B, 7B), Falcon (40B, 7B),
and Mistral (7B). The variability of these tasks and
models shows the generality of our approach.
We find that the faithfulness of instruction-tuned
LLMs depends on the model, explanation, and task.
For example, regarding Llama2 (70B), counterfac-
tuals only work with IMDB, and feature attribution
only works with RTE and bAbI, clearly showing a
task dependence. Additionally, we show our find-
ings are robust to prompt variations.
Because faithfulness is explanation and task-
dependent, we suggest self-explanations cannot
generally be trusted and propose how future work
might address this challenge.
2
Self-explanations
LLMs’ ability to produce highly convincing self-
explanations is a new development in the field of
interpretability. Previously, a separate model or
algorithm generated the explanation (Madsen et al.,
2022b), not the predictive model itself. This devel-
opment creates new challenges and opportunities
(Singh et al., 2024).
For example, counterfactuals are often generated
using an explanation model which is almost com-
pletely independent of the classification model they
explain (Ross et al., 2021; Kaushik et al., 2020).
The explanations may be generated by fine-tuning
on a dataset with human-annotated explanations,
where the classification model is only used to fil-
ter the generated explanations (Wu et al., 2021; Li
et al., 2022). This is a problem because humans

have no insight into the classification model’s be-
havior (Wiegreffe and Marasovi´c, 2021; Jacovi and
Goldberg, 2020). Therefore, there is little reason
to think that the counterfactuals represent the clas-
sification model (Hase et al., 2020a).
Instead, we let the language model generate both
the classification and the counterfactual explana-
tion. In principle, because the weights are the same,
the explanation generation can access or simulate
the classification behavior; a property known as
self-model capabilities. Kadavath et al. (2022) ex-
plores the self-model capabilities of LLMs using
a self-consistency check and find that LLMs have
poor self-modeling capabilities.
That being said, it is possible that self-model
capabilities are helpful but not necessary for gen-
erating self-explanations. If the LLM reproduces
human behavior sufficiently well in both the classi-
fication and counterfactual case, then the explana-
tions would be self-consistent and thus faithful.
Because Kadavath et al. (2022) have already ex-
plored self-model capabilities, and it might not be
necessary for faithful self-explanations, we limit
the scope to faithfulness evaluation.
3
Interpretability-faithfulness of
self-explanations
This section describes the general methodology we
propose and its principles, using counterfactuals as
an example. Section 4 then goes into detail on the
different kinds of explanations and datasets where
this approach is possible and how we precisely
formulate the prompts.
3.1
Self-consistency check
Counterfactuals are explanations where the input is
modified such that the model predicts the opposite
label. The intention is to provide a contrastive ex-
ample to explain the model’s behavior (Wu et al.,
2021; Ross et al., 2021; Madsen et al., 2022b). For
example, in the hiring-recommendation example
(Figure 1), instead of asking for a general expla-
nation (e.g. “Why are you recommending not to
hire”), we directly asked the language model to
modify the resume such that it would yield a posi-
tive hiring recommendation.
Because the goal is to produce the opposite label,
we can re-evaluate the prediction with the coun-
terfactual and check that this goal is satisfied. If
satisfied, the counterfactual is faithful. We refer to
such re-evaluation as a “self-consistency check”.
Note that when using an instruction-tuned LLM
in a conversational setting, it’s important to per-
form the re-evaluation using a new chat session.
Otherwise, the chat model may predict the oppo-
site label only because it was previously prompted
to do so within the chat history.
3.2
Negative results and robustness
If the self-consistency check does not pass, we
don’t know if the model cannot generate faithful
counterfactuals in general or if a different prompt or
generation sample would generate interpretability-
faithful explanations. Therefore, negative results
are less informative than positive results.
However, it’s important to consider the practical
application where an end user asks a chat model for
an explanation. Regular users may not be critical
regarding the explanation. As such, we desire mod-
els that are robust to natural prompt variations and
minor sampling differences, by providing faithful
explanations in all cases.
Therefore, when measuring interpretability-
faithfulness, we use six different prompt patterns in
order to assess the LLMs’ robustness. Furthermore,
we consider finding just one non-faithful prompt
pattern significantly problematic.
4
Prompt-patterns for self-explanation
and self-consistency checks
This section provides the specific details and con-
siderations behind the prompts used in the exper-
iment section. Specifically, the prompts that gen-
erate the counterfactual, feature attribution, and
redaction explanations. As well as the prompt for
generating the classification.
To facilitate the “specific details,” we use senti-
ment classification as an example. However, the
methodology generalizes to multi-choice Q&A
datasets (e.g., bAbI) and multi-paragraph classi-
fication (e.g., NLI). Prompts for those tasks are in
Appendix E.2 and Appendix E.3, respectively.
All prompts are used with chat-tuned models,
as these models are typically deployed and pro-
vide a well-defined framing mechanism between
input and output1. Such framing helps to avoid
some out-of-distribution issues compared to purely
instruction-tuned models. However, the prompts
only convey a one-time input-output relation and
1For example, Llama2 frames the user message with spe-
cial [INST] and [/INST] tokens (Touvron et al., 2023).

thus could be used with purely instruction-tuned
models given the proper framing.
It should be noted that it’s impossible to prove
that the model understands the user’s intent. How-
ever, it’s worth prioritizing the user’s intent rather
than the model’s understanding when evaluating
the potential impact of deployed models.
4.1
Counterfactual explanation
We generate counterfactuals by asking for an edit
that generates the opposite sentiment. In Figure 2.
we explicitly express the target sentiment in the
prompt. To evaluate robustness to prompt vari-
ations, we also consider an implicit version by
replacing “is {opposite sentiment}” with “be-
comes the opposite of what it currently is”.
The “Do not explain the answer.” part of the
prompt template in Figure 2 (and the other prompts)
is there to prevent the model from providing ad-
ditional details about why it produced the coun-
terfactual. These details prolong inference time
and cannot be validated using our self-consistency
framework. Despite this instruction, some models
will occasionally provide them regardless; if this
happens, the extra explanation is removed.
The model output is fairly systematic, often
prefixing the counterfactual paragraph with “Para-
graph:” or providing a clear separation, making it
easy to extract the counterfactual paragraph.
Edit the following paragraph such that the
sentiment is "{opposite sentiment}".
Make as few edits as possible. Do not ex-
plain the answer.
Paragraph: {paragraph}
input prompt template
Paragraph: The movie was excellent ...
partial output example
Figure 2: The explicit input-template prompt used for
generating the counterfactual explanation. {opposite
sentiment} is replaced with either “positive” or “neg-
ative”. {paragraph} is replaced with the content. We
also consider an implicit version where “is {opposite
sentiment}” is replaced with “becomes the opposite
of what it currently is”. The partial output example is
entirely generated by the model.
4.2
Feature attribution explanation
A common alternative to counterfactual expla-
nations is feature attribution.
These explana-
tions highlight which input words are important
for making a prediction.
The faithfulness of
these explanations can be evaluated using a self-
consistency check, where the important words are
redacted/masked (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Karpathy
et al., 2015; Sundararajan et al., 2017). Given a
faithful explanation, it will be impossible for the
model to perform the classification task (Samek
et al., 2017; Hooker et al., 2019; Madsen et al.,
2022a), assuming that the model understands the
meaning of redaction/masking during classifica-
tion. We discuss this and the classification setup in
Section 4.4.
The model is only provided with the input
prompt shown in Figure 3. The model response is
a list of important words, and the matching words
in the paragraph are replaced with “[REDACTED]”.
List the most important words for deter-
mining the sentiment of the following para-
graph, such that without these words the
sentiment can not be determined. Do not
explain the answer.
Paragraph: {paragraph}
Important words: "great," "amazing," ...
Figure 3: The input-template prompt used for generating
the feature attribution explanations. The model will
often generate either a bullet-point list or a comma-
separated list.
4.3
Redaction explanation
Redaction explanations are a less common vari-
ation of feature attribution explanations. Instead
of algorithmically replacing important words with
“[REDACTED]”, we ask the model to perform the re-
placement directly. The prompt-template is shown
in Figure 4. As a prompt variation, we also use
“[REMOVED]” instead of “[REDACTED]”.
Readaction may be easier for the model because
the LLMs likely have built-in mechanisms for copy-
ing content (McDougall et al., 2023). In principle,
the model could redact the entire paragraph, as we
don’t constrain the redaction amount. This would
be a faithful explanation but not a very useful ex-
planation to humans (Doshi-Velez and Kim, 2017),
we also don’t observe such behavior in practice
(see for example Appendix E.1.3).
Besides the different replacement mechanisms,
the interpretability-faithfulness metric works the

Redact the most important words for de-
termining the sentiment of the following
paragraph, by replacing important words
with [REDACTED], such that without these
words the sentiment can not be determined.
Do not explain the answer.
Paragraph: {paragraph}
Paragraph: The movie was [REDACTED] ...
Figure 4: The input-template prompt used for generat-
ing redaction explanations. We also consider a prompt
where “[REMOVED]” is used instead of “[REDACTED]”.
same. The explanation is faithful if the model can
not classify the redacted paragraph.
4.4
Classification
So far, we have discussed how to generate expla-
nations. However, the self-consistency evaluation
depends on a classification of the original para-
graph and the explanation paragraph (or, in the case
of feature attribution, it’s the paragraph modified
using the explanation).
In Section 4.2 and Section 4.3, we use a
“[REDACTED]” string to indicate that content is miss-
ing. We do this rather than removing content, as
removing it could create ungrammatical content
that can create out-of-distribution issues (Madsen
et al., 2023, 2022a). As such, the classification
should be robust to [REDACTED] tokens.
Finally, in the case of feature attribution (Sec-
tion 4.2) and redaction explanations (Section 4.3),
the paragraph of faithful explanation can not be
classified. Therefore, the classification should al-
What is the sentiment of the following para-
graph? The paragraph can contain redacted
words marked with [REDACTED]. Answer
only "positive", "negative", "neutral", or "un-
known". Do not explain the answer.
Paragraph: {paragraph}
Positive
Figure 5: Prompt-template for classification.
The
prompt needs to support redaction and an “unknown”
class for when the classification can not be performed
due to missing information.
low for an “unknown” class prediction.
Importantly, the same prompt template is used
in all cases (Figure 5); as in, for all explanations
and both before and after the explanation step. The
“unknown” and “[REDACTED]” support is not re-
quired for the counterfactual case but is kept for
consistency and comparability.
4.5
Persona robustness
In the past sections, we presented some prompt
modifications specific to each explanation. Inspired
by Deshpande et al. (2023), we propose the idea
of using “persona” as a prompt modification that
can be applied to any prompt. In our setup, a “per-
sona” means that the subject of the explanation or
classification request is either “you” or “a human”.
For example, the previously presented prompts
(e.g., Figure 5) asked the question (e.g., “What is
the sentiment ..”) in an objective manner. Instead,
it’s possible to ask “What would you classify the
sentiment as” or “What would a human classify the
sentiment as” – the exact prompts are provided in
Appendix E. We hypothesize that personas could
be relevant for the model’s classification and expla-
nation (Deshpande et al., 2023). For example, the
“you” persona may be significant if the model has
self-modeling capabilities (Kadavath et al., 2022).
5
Results
To evaluate prompt sensitivity, all the prompt vari-
ations from Section 4 (details in Appendix E) are
evaluated using the Llama2-70B model fine-tuned
for chatting (Touvron et al., 2023).
In addition, we use a default case to show differ-
ences across model types and sizes by evaluating
on: Mistral v0.1 (7B) (Jiang et al., 2023), Falcon
(7B and 40B) (Penedo et al., 2023), and Llama2
(7B and 70B) (Touvron et al., 2023). Model details
are in Appendix B, with additional details (e.g.,
generation configuration) in Appendix C.
We perform all experiments with sentiment clas-
sification (IMDB), multi-choice Q&A tasks (bAbI-
1 and MCTest), and an entailment/NLI task (RTE),
details of which are in Appendix A. The prompts
for these datasets are slightly different; see Ap-
pendix E. The variability amoung the datasets,
demonstrates that our methodology generalizes to
both paragraph-based multi-choice questions and
two-paragraph tasks. In all cases, the main para-
graph is modified through the explanation. The
questions, choices, or hypotheses are not modified.

Default case:
The “[REDACTED]” token is
used, counterfactuals use explicit targets, and all
prompts use an objective persona.
5.1
Classification
Before evaluating the faithfulness, it’s worth first in-
vestigating the classification accuracy for each task.
In addition, this experiment also investigates the ef-
fect of persona (you, human, and objective) and the
redaction-instruction ([REDACTED] or [REMOVED]).
To validate that the redaction instruction does not
cause issues, an ablation study with no redaction
instruction (None) is also performed.
Figure 6 shows that neither the redaction-
instruction nor the persona affects the results much.
This is the desired result, as the redaction instruc-
tion should not affect the classification and supports
just analyzing the default case will be sufficient.
Using the default case, Figure 7 shows the effect
None
"redacted"
"removed"
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
IMDB
None
"redacted"
"removed"
MCTest
None
"redacted"
"removed"
RTE
None
"redacted"
"removed"
bAbI-1
Redaction instruction
Accuracy
Persona instruction
Human
You
Objective
Figure 6: The classification accuracy of each task using
Llama2-70B, with different prompt variations. Perfor-
mance is not affected much by the persona or redaction-
instruction.
7 40 70
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
IMDB
7 40 70
MCTest
7 40 70
RTE
7 40 70
bAbI-1
Model size [B]
Accuracy
Model type
Falcon
Llama 2
Mistral v0.1
Figure 7: The classification accuracy of each task with
the default prompt settings. Performance is highly de-
pendent on model type and size.
of different model types and sizes. There is quite a
lot of variation between the different models. The
most surprising result is that Falcon 40B performs
slightly worse than Falcon 7B. Unfortunately, due
to the complexity and lack of documentation re-
garding these models, it’s hard to make an educated
guess on why this is.
Some task and model combinations do not per-
form well. This could be problematic if, for exam-
ple, an LLM classifies a positive-sentiment input as
negative, and the counterfactual explanation asks
for it to become negative, then it would appear that
the explanation is faithful despite the explanation
having made potentially no changes to the input.
As the scope of this paper is faithfulness evaluation,
not classification performance, we do not attempt
to improve the classification performance. Instead,
only the correctly predicted observations are used
to evaluate faithfulness; the rest are discarded.
5.2
Faithfulness
Using only the observations that are correctly clas-
sified and produce meaningful results (e.g., discard-
ing “As an AI model I cannot do that.”), we evaluate
the faithfulness of each observation. Because our
self-consistency method determines whether or not
an observation is faithful, faithfulness in this paper
refers to the ratio of faithful observations.
Figure 8 show the faithfulness, for each prompt-
variation for Llama2-70B. Figure 9 show faith-
fulness with the default prompt settings for each
model type and size.
5.2.1
Counterfactual
From the prompt-variation results in Figure 8, we
find that the persona has little effect. Making the
counterfactual target implicit or explicit also does
not affect faithfulness much. The exception here is
for MCTest and bAbI-1, which is expected as these
are multi-choice datasets thus for an implicit-target
there are multiple correct answers, while there is
only one correct answer using an explicit-target.
As such, this is all positive, as the goal is to have
models that are robust to prompt variations.
From the model-variation results in Figure 9, we
find that Llama2 and Mistral are only consistently
faithful for IMDB sentiment classification, while
Falcon never performs well.
5.2.2
Feature attribution
The feature attribution experiments show again that
Llama2-70B is robust to prompt variations (Fig-

ure 8), which is the desired outcome. However,
we find that only for RTE and bAbI-1 is Llama2-
70B faithful. The size particularly affects faithful-
ness, where Llama2-7B and Falcon-7B perform
very poorly. Despite this, Mistral (7B) is surpris-
ingly good at identifying important words for senti-
ment classification, drastically outperforming every
other model (Figure 9).
While it might be surprising that the models gen-
erally perform poorly, it makes sense that bAbI-1
is an easy task, as there are, from a human per-
spective, only two relevant words for answering
the question (a location and individual).
5.2.3
Redaction
The redaction experiments show results similar to
the feature attribution experiment. This makes
sense as the two explanations are similar in na-
ture.
This is particularly true for Llama2-70B,
which have nearly identical results for the different
prompt variations (Figure 8).
This similarity also addresses a potential concern
with feature attribution explanations, which is that
masking (i.e. the [REDACTED] token) inputs might
create out-of-distribution results. However, for the
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Counterfact
Feature
Redaction
IMDB
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
MCTest
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
RTE
Explicit
target
Implicit
target
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
"redacted"
"removed"
"redacted"
"removed"
bAbI-1
Explanation dependent prompt variation
Faithfulness
Persona instruction
Human
You
Objective
Figure 8: Faithfulness evaluation using self-consistency
checks, evaluated using Llama2-70B. Results show that
Llama2-70B is not affected by prompt variations, but the
faithfulness for each explanation type is task-dependent.
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Counterfact
Feature
Redaction
IMDB
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
MCTest
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
RTE
7
40 70
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
7
40 70
7
40 70
bAbI-1
Model size [B]
Faithfulness
Model type
Falcon
Llama 2
Mistral v0.1
Figure 9: Faithfulness evaluation using self-consistency
checks, evaluated with default prompt settings. Results
show that faithfulness generally increases with size, the
exception being Falcon, particularly in the counterfac-
tual case. In general, the results are heavily dependent
on the model type, tasks, and explanation.
redaction explanations, the masking is generated
by the model, and sound therefore is in-distribution.
The observation that redaction and feature attribu-
tion have similar results, validates that masking
does not cause any issues for the feature attribution
explanations.
Finally, we do observe that Falcon-40B gener-
ally performs much better for this task compared
to other models, given the IMDB and MCTest
datasets. Also, surprisingly Falcon-40B performs
worse than Falcon-7B for bAbI-1. This is partic-
ularly surprising as bAbI-1 is a synthetic dataset
with few important words, hence it should be an
easy task.
6
Related work
Using self-consistency checks to measure faithful-
ness is not a new idea. One of the earliest uses
was with feature attribution, where allegedly im-
portant information was removed from the input,
and it was then checked that this removal altered
the prediction (Samek et al., 2017; Hooker et al.,
2019; Madsen et al., 2022a). These earlier works
used an external explanation algorithm rather than
self-explanations. Another important difference is
that the classification was not discrete (e.g., posi-

tive or negative sentiment) but provided logits. The
logit values were then measured before and after
information removal, and the difference provides a
more nuanced faithfulness metric.
The self-consistency idea has also been adopted
for self-explanations. Huang et al. (2023), applied
the same idea to self-explanation feature attribution
from ChatGPT on a sentiment classification task
(a 100 observation subset of SST (Socher et al.,
2013)). Because ChatGPT does not provide log-
its, they instruct ChatGPT to provide a confidence
score between 1 and 0 for either positive or nega-
tive sentiment. Similarly, they instruct ChatGPT
to provide scores for the importance of each word.
Using this approach, previous methods can in prin-
ciple be easily applied. Unfortunately, they find
their approach ineffective as the confidence and
importance scores are not calibrated, and ChatGPT
resists classifying as positive or negative sentiment
when information is missing. For this reason, they
call for better faithfulness metrics targeted LLM
self-explanations.
In contrast, our approach does not depend on
any scores (confidence or importance). Instead, the
models perform discrete classification and can pre-
dict “unknown”. This solves the aforementioned
issues identified by Huang et al. (2023).
Self-consistency checks have also been used to
measure the faithfulness of mathematical counter-
factuals. In particular, Lanham et al. (2023) applies
self-consistency checks to Chain-of-Thought (CoT)
self-explanations from LLMs, where the CoTs pro-
vide mathematical context (e.g. “2 + 3 = 5”) to a
mathematical question. Lanham et al. (2023) then
edits the CoT to contain false information (e.g. “2
+ 3 = 6”) and checks that the prediction follows.
The issue here is that injecting false facts may cre-
ate out-of-distribution results or be interpreted as
typos by the LLM, thus it’s unclear if this method
is completely valid. Regardless, they find similar
to our paper, that faithfulness is model and task-
dependent.
6.1
Non-faithfulness works
Self-consistency checks also have been used to ana-
lyze other LLMs’ capabilities. For example, Kada-
vath et al. (2022) analyzed LLM self-modeling ca-
pabilities by comparing asking if the LLM knows
the answer (Yes/No) and asking the LLM to an-
swer directly. Li et al. (2023) performs a similar
task with mathematical questions (e.g., comparing
“What is 7 + 8?” with “7+8=15, True or False”). Fi-
nally, Hu and Levy (2023) evaluates meta-linguistic
capabilities using self-consistency checks.
Outside of self-consistency checks, Chen et al.
(2023) measures the simulatability of counterfac-
tual self-explanations. Simulatability means that
humans can predict the model’s behavior on input
y, given an explanation for a similar input x. Chen
et al. (2023) find that self-explanations are very
convincing to humans (plausibility) but there is no
correlation with simulatability. This shows that
self-explanations from LLMs can be misleading
(Agarwal et al., 2024). These findings highlight the
importance of providing faithful explanations. A
challenge with simulatability is it’s difficult to en-
sure that humans use the explanations and not their
world-knowledge to predict the model. Faithful-
ness does not have this challenge and it’s therefore
important to also measure faithfulness.
Finally, it’s worth briefly mentioning works on
rationalizations. These are explanations by humans
(e.g., e-SNLI (Camburu et al., 2018)) or by a model
that has learned from human explanations. Ratio-
nalizations should not be used to explain the model
(Jacovi and Goldberg, 2020) but may help convince
humans of a prediction. As such, most works are on
plausibility, but there are also simulatability studies
(Hase et al., 2020b) and faithfulness evaluations
(Atanasova et al., 2023). Although Parcalabescu
and Frank (2023) argues that the works on faithful-
ness only measure consistency, not faithfulness.
7
Conclusion
Our investigation reveals that self-explanations’
faithfulness is highly model and dataset-dependent.
This conclusion is similar to previous works (Lan-
ham et al., 2023; Madsen et al., 2022a; Bastings
et al., 2022). Our contribution is the ability to
measure faithfulness on LLMs’ self-explanations,
specifically counterfactuals, feature attribution, and
redaction explanations.
The task dependence is concerning as it means
LLM self-explanations cannot generally be trusted.
There is also no reason to trust more free-form
explanations where faithfulness can not be evalu-
ated using self-consistency checks. This increases
the risk with LLMs, as individuals may have the
misconception that LLMs can explain themselves
(Chen et al., 2023).

7.1
Future work
We propose that future work on developing
instruction-tuned LLMs also evaluate the self-
explanation faithfulness using the methodology pre-
sented in this paper. We believe that this direction
is necessary to decrease the risk of LLMs.
It may also be possible to fine-tune LLMs to-
wards greater faithfulness. In particular, Kadavath
et al. (2022) showed that it’s possible to fine-tune
a model to improve its self-modeling capabilities.
As such, it stands to reason that improving self-
explanation capabilities is also possible. Further-
more, as we suggest in Section 2, self-model capa-
bilities may also improve self-explanation capabili-
ties. Unfortunately, the model trained by Kadavath
et al. (2022) is not available to the public, thus we
were not able to evaluate this.
Finally, due to the difficulty in evaluating self-
explanations, we suggest that self-explanation faith-
fulness should be treated as an out-of-domain eval-
uation problem. For example, one could fine-tune
for only counterfactual faithfulness and show that
feature attribution and redaction explanations im-
prove too. This would give credit to the model’s
explanation capabilities in general, including more
free-formed explanations, which cannot be as eas-
ily evaluated using self-consistency checks.
Limitations
Absolute faithfulness
Jacovi and Goldberg (2020) argue that the
interpretability-faithfulness field should move to-
wards a more nuanced view on interpretability-
faithfulness, where the metric is not if an expla-
nation is faithful or not, but how much faithfulness
it has. We agree with this notion, but because the
LLMs are designed to provide discrete outputs (a
sequence of tokens), we have not been able to do
that.
That being said, our absolute faithfulness is only
for a single observation. We still provide an aggre-
gation average, which provide the nuanced view on
the model’s faithfulness as a whole.
Assuming the prompt is interpreted correctly
Our work is based on a fundamental assumption
that the prompts are interpreted correctly by the
model. This is not possible to completely verify.
However, we attempt to ensure this by providing
natural sounding prompts. Hence, if the model
doesn’t understand these prompts and therefore
generates unfaithful explanations or inaccurate clas-
sification, it’s a limitation of the model’s compre-
hension capabilities.
Additionally, we find that for at-least one dataset
we get high classification accuracy or explanation-
faithfulness. This indicates that the model does
interpret these prompts sufficiently, it’s just not
able to perform the requested task.
No in-context learning
Because in-context learning have shown good re-
sults on many downstream tasks (Dong et al., 2022),
it’s tempting to think the same is possible for gener-
ating explanations. Unfortunately, this is problem-
atic as it would require known true explanations,
which is not possible for humans to provide. There-
fore, this paper only uses zero-shot explanations.
Poor classification performance creates
challenging comparison
For most tasks we use, the LLMs do not perform
well at the classification task and archives low ac-
curacy. As the goal of this paper is to measure
interpretability-faithfulness, not accuracy, we sim-
ply discard the incorrect observations. However,
this does mean that comparisons will be more chal-
lenging for future work. There may also be a class
imbalance, in what observations were selected.
Impossible to show lack of capability
Our results demonstrate that the LLMs will, in
some cases, consistently not provide faithful ex-
planations. However, this does not show that the
model is fundamentally unable to provide the expla-
nations. It only shows that for the specific prompt-
templates, the explanations are not faithful. Be-
cause our work shows that it’s very challenging to
generate faithful explanations, user’s should not
trust the explanations. Unfortunately, users often
find these explanations to be very convincing (Chen
et al., 2023), we thus think this is problematic
enough to warrant concern about AI Safety. How-
ever, it is not definitive evidence that the model’s
can never explain themselves.
Limited number of explanation tasks
We provide interpretability-faithfulness results on 3
kinds of explanations: counterfactuals, importance
measures, and redaction. Importance measures and
redaction are also quite similar in the explanation
they provide. As such, there is not a great vari-
ety of explanations in this paper. However, these

are currently the only explanations for which self-
consistently can be used to measure interpretability-
faithfulness. We hope that future work can identify
new ways of using self-consistently checks.
7.2
Not measuring on ChatGPT, GPT-4
We do not evaluate on ChatGPT, GPT-4 and other
popular closed models. This because such models
are not static models. They are frequently updated,
by for example OpenAI, and we don’t have the
means to choose a specific model version. As such,
it would not be possible to reproduce our results.
Additionally, These models use a license agree-
ment with an unrestricted indemnity-clause. As
such, if we were to show that the explanations are
not faithful, this could damage the companies be-
hind these products, and we may become finan-
cially liable for damages. Due to this personal risk,
we do not believe a truly unbiased analysis can be
provided.
Ethics Statement
This
paper
discusses
how
to
measure
the
interpretability-faithfulness
of
LLMs
self-
explanations.
As such, any mistakes in our
methodology could lead to unsupported confidence
or skepticism about LLMs. Additional skepticism
likely won’t cause ethical issues.
However,
unsupported confidence can be very dangerous.
The message of this paper, is that LLMs should
not be assumed to provide faithful explanations.
As such, we do not think this paper in itself could
provide unsupported confidence.
As for model choices, we have specifically only
used models where the license agreements do not
restrict what we can say about the model. This
should give the reader confidence that our views
are unbiased. This is unlike ChatGPT or GPT-
4, which include an unrestricted indemnity-clause
in their license agreement, which could make us
financially liable for damages.
Acknowledgements
Sarath Chandar is supported by the Canada CIFAR
AI Chairs program, the Canada Research Chair
in Lifelong Machine Learning, and the NSERC
Discovery Grant.
Siva Reddy is supported by the Facebook CIFAR
AI Chairs program and NSERC Discovery Grant.
Computing resources were provided by the Digi-
tal Research Alliance of Canada.
References
Chirag Agarwal, Sree Harsha Tanneru, and Himabindu
Lakkaraju. 2024. Faithfulness vs. Plausibility: On
the (Un)Reliability of Explanations from Large Lan-
guage Models. arXiv.
Pepa Atanasova, Oana-Maria Camburu, Christina Li-
oma, Thomas Lukasiewicz, Jakob Grue Simonsen,
and Isabelle Augenstein. 2023. Faithfulness Tests
for Natural Language Explanations. In Proceedings
of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers),
volume 2, pages 283–294, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yejin Bang, Samuel Cahyawijaya, Nayeon Lee, Wen-
liang Dai, Dan Su, Bryan Wilie, Holy Lovenia, Ziwei
Ji, Tiezheng Yu, Willy Chung, Quyet V. Do, Yan Xu,
and Pascale Fung. 2023. A Multitask, Multilingual,
Multimodal Evaluation of ChatGPT on Reasoning,
Hallucination, and Interactivity. arXiv.
Jasmijn Bastings, Sebastian Ebert, Polina Zablotskaia,
Anders Sandholm, and Katja Filippova. 2022. “Will
You Find These Shortcuts?” A Protocol for Evaluat-
ing the Faithfulness of Input Salience Methods for
Text Classification. In Proceedings of the 2022 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 976–991, Stroudsburg, PA, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Oana-Maria Camburu, Tim Rocktäschel, Thomas
Lukasiewicz, and Phil Blunsom. 2018. e-SNLI: Natu-
ral Language Inference with Natural Language Expla-
nations. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, volume 2018-Decem, pages 9539–9549.
Yanda Chen, Ruiqi Zhong, Narutatsu Ri, Chen Zhao,
He He, Jacob Steinhardt, Zhou Yu, and Kathleen
McKeown. 2023. Do Models Explain Themselves?
Counterfactual Simulatability of Natural Language
Explanations. arXiv.
Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2006. The PASCAL Recognising Textual Entailment
Challenge. In Joaquin Quiñonero-Candela, Ido Da-
gan, Bernardo Magnini, and Florence D’Alché-Buc,
editors, Machine Learning Challenges. Evaluating
Predictive Uncertainty, Visual Object Classification,
and Recognising Tectual Entailment, pages 177–190.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Ameet Deshpande, Vishvak Murahari, Tanmay Rajpuro-
hit, Ashwin Kalyan, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2023.
Toxicity in chatgpt: Analyzing persona-assigned lan-
guage models. In Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pages
1236–1270, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Ce Zheng, Zhiyong
Wu, Baobao Chang, Xu Sun, Jingjing Xu, Lei Li, and
Zhifang Sui. 2022. A Survey on In-context Learning.
arXiv.

Finale Doshi-Velez and Been Kim. 2017. Towards A
Rigorous Science of Interpretable Machine Learning.
arXiv.
Peter Hase, Shiyue Zhang, Harry Xie, and Mohit Bansal.
2020a. Leakage-Adjusted Simulatability: Can Mod-
els Generate Non-Trivial Explanations of Their Be-
havior in Natural Language?
In Findings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2020, pages 4351–4367, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Peter Hase, Shiyue Zhang, Harry Xie, and Mohit Bansal.
2020b. Leakage-adjusted simulatability: Can models
generate non-trivial explanations of their behavior in
natural language? Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics Findings of ACL: EMNLP
2020, pages 4351–4367.
Sara Hooker, Dumitru Erhan, Pieter-Jan Jan Kinder-
mans, and Been Kim. 2019. A benchmark for in-
terpretability methods in deep neural networks. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
volume 32.
Jennifer Hu and Roger Levy. 2023. Prompt-based meth-
ods may underestimate large language models’ lin-
guistic generalizations. arXiv.
Shiyuan Huang, Siddarth Mamidanna, Shreedhar
Jangam, Yilun Zhou, and Leilani H. Gilpin. 2023.
Can Large Language Models Explain Themselves? A
Study of LLM-Generated Self-Explanations. arXiv.
Alon Jacovi and Yoav Goldberg. 2020. Towards Faith-
fully Interpretable NLP Systems: How Should We
Define and Evaluate Faithfulness? In Proceedings of
the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 4198–4205, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Men-
sch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego
de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guil-
laume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, Lélio Renard Lavaud,
Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao,
Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix,
and William El Sayed. 2023. Mistral 7B. arXiv,
pages 1–9.
Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, Tom
Henighan, Dawn Drain, Ethan Perez, Nicholas
Schiefer, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Nova DasSarma, Eli
Tran-Johnson, Scott Johnston, Sheer El-Showk,
Andy Jones, Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Anna
Chen, Yuntao Bai, Sam Bowman, Stanislav Fort,
Deep Ganguli, Danny Hernandez, Josh Jacobson,
Jackson Kernion, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Ka-
mal Ndousse, Catherine Olsson, Sam Ringer, Dario
Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Nicholas Joseph,
Ben Mann, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, and Jared
Kaplan. 2022. Language Models (Mostly) Know
What They Know. Anthropic.
Andrej Karpathy, Justin Johnson, and Li Fei-Fei. 2015.
Visualizing and Understanding Recurrent Networks.
arXiv, pages 1–12.
Divyansh Kaushik, Eduard Hovy, and Zachary C. Lip-
ton. 2020. Learning The Difference That Makes A
Difference With Counterfactually-Augmented Data.
In International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions.
Akhil Alfons Kodiyan. 2019. An overview of ethical
issues in using AI systems in hiring with a case study
of Amazon’s AI based hiring tool. Researchgate
Preprint, pages 1–19.
Tamera Lanham, Anna Chen, Ansh Radhakrishnan,
Benoit Steiner, Carson Denison, Danny Hernandez,
Dustin Li, Esin Durmus, Evan Hubinger, Jackson
Kernion, Kamil˙e Lukoši¯ut˙e, Karina Nguyen, Newton
Cheng, Nicholas Joseph, Nicholas Schiefer, Oliver
Rausch, Robin Larson, Sam McCandlish, Sandipan
Kundu, Saurav Kadavath, Shannon Yang, Thomas
Henighan, Timothy Maxwell, Timothy Telleen-
Lawton, Tristan Hume, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Jared
Kaplan, Jan Brauner, Samuel R. Bowman, and Ethan
Perez. 2023. Measuring Faithfulness in Chain-of-
Thought Reasoning. arXiv.
Nayeon Lee, Yejin Bang, Andrea Madotto, Madian
Khabsa, and Pascale Fung. 2021.
Towards Few-
Shot Fact-Checking via Perplexity. NAACL-HLT
2021 - 2021 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Proceedings of the
Conference, pages 1971–1981.
Xiang Lisa Li, Vaishnavi Shrivastava, Siyan Li, Tat-
sunori Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. 2023. Bench-
marking and Improving Generator-Validator Consis-
tency of Language Models. arXiv, pages 1–15.
Zichao Li, Prakhar Sharma, Xing Han Lu, Jackie Che-
ung, and Siva Reddy. 2022. Using Interactive Feed-
back to Improve the Accuracy and Explainability of
Question Answering Systems Post-Deployment. In
Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: ACL 2022, pages 926–937, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. 2022.
TruthfulQA: Measuring How Models Mimic Human
Falsehoods.
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
1:3214–3252.
Andrew L. Maas, Raymond E. Daly, Peter T. Pham,
Dan Huang, Andrew Y. Ng, and Christopher Potts.
2011. Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis.
In ACL-HLT 2011 - Proceedings of the 49th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, volume 1,
pages 142–150, Portland, Oregon, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Andreas Madsen, Nicholas Meade, Vaibhav Adlakha,
and Siva Reddy. 2022a.
Evaluating the Faithful-
ness of Importance Measures in NLP by Recursively
Masking Allegedly Important Tokens and Retraining.
In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: EMNLP 2022, pages 1731–1751, Abu
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Andreas Madsen, Siva Reddy, and Sarath Chandar.
2022b. Post-hoc Interpretability for Neural NLP:
A Survey. ACM Computing Surveys, 55(8):1–42.
Andreas Madsen, Siva Reddy, and Sarath Chandar. 2023.
Faithfulness Measurable Masked Language Models.
arXiv.
Callum McDougall, Arthur Conmy, Cody Rushing,
Thomas McGrath, and Neel Nanda. 2023. Copy Sup-
pression: Comprehensively Understanding an Atten-
tion Head. In NeurIPS 2023 Workshop on Attributing
Model Behavior at Scale.
Tim Miller. 2019. Explanation in artificial intelligence:
Insights from the social sciences. Artificial Intelli-
gence, 267:1–38.
OpenAI. 2023. GPT-4 Technical Report. OpenAI, 4:1–
100.
Letitia Parcalabescu and Anette Frank. 2023. On Mea-
suring Faithfulness of Natural Language Explana-
tions. arXiv.
Guilherme Penedo, Quentin Malartic, Daniel Hesslow,
Ruxandra Cojocaru, Alessandro Cappelli, Hamza
Alobeidli, Baptiste Pannier, Ebtesam Almazrouei,
and Julien Launay. 2023. The RefinedWeb Dataset
for Falcon LLM: Outperforming Curated Corpora
with Web Data, and Web Data Only. arXiv.
Vipula Rawte, Amit Sheth, and Amitava Das. 2023. A
Survey of Hallucination in Large Foundation Models.
arXiv.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos
Guestrin. 2016. "Why should i trust you?" Explain-
ing the predictions of any classifier. In Proceedings
of the ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, volume 13-
17-Augu, pages 1135–1144, New York, NY, USA.
ACM.
Matthew Richardson, Christopher J.C. Burges, and Erin
Renshaw. 2013. MCTest: A challenge dataset for
the open-domain machine comprehension of text.
EMNLP 2013 - 2013 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, Proceedings of
the Conference, D13-1020(October):193–203.
Alexis Ross, Ana Marasovi´c, and Matthew Peters. 2021.
Explaining NLP Models via Minimal Contrastive
Editing (MiCE).
In Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021,
pages 3840–3852, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Associa-
tio
