URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2411.15102
Type: PDF
Length: 82742 chars (truncated)

--- Content ---

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
ATTRIBOT: A BAG OF TRICKS FOR EFFICIENTLY
APPROXIMATING LEAVE-ONE-OUT CONTEXT
ATTRIBUTION
Fengyuan Liu ∗, Nikhil Kandpal, Colin Raffel
University of Toronto, Vector Institute
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
fy.liu@mail.utoronto.ca
ABSTRACT
The influence of contextual input on the behavior of large language models
(LLMs) has prompted the development of context attribution methods that aim to
quantify each context span’s effect on an LLM’s generations. The leave-one-out
(LOO) error, which measures the change in the likelihood of the LLM’s response
when a given span of the context is removed, provides a principled way to per-
form context attribution, but can be prohibitively expensive to compute for large
models. In this work, we introduce AttriBoT, a series of novel techniques for
efficiently computing an approximation of the LOO error for context attribution.
Specifically, AttriBoT uses cached activations to avoid redundant operations, per-
forms hierarchical attribution to reduce computation, and emulates the behavior
of large target models with smaller proxy models. Taken together, AttriBoT can
provide a >300× speedup while remaining more faithful to a target model’s LOO
error than prior context attribution methods. This stark increase in performance
makes computing context attributions for a given response 30× faster than gener-
ating the response itself, empowering real-world applications that require comput-
ing attributions at scale. We release a user-friendly and efficient implementation
of AttriBoT to enable efficient LLM interpretability as well as encourage future
development of efficient context attribution methods 1.
1
INTRODUCTION
The use of large language models (LLMs) has proliferated in recent years including the integration of
OpenAI’s GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2024) and Google’s Gemini (Team, 2024) into Apple and Android-based
products with billions of users. As LLMs become more widely used, their influence on information
access, decision-making, and social interactions will grow, as will with the consequences of incorrect
or problematic outputs. The risks and impact of this widespread adoption spur the need for a deeper
understanding of how and why LLMs generate their outputs. Indeed, a great deal of recent work on
LLM interpretability aims to uncover and elucidate their inner workings, including determining the
influence of pre-training data (Koh & Liang, 2020; Grosse et al., 2023; Kandpal et al., 2023) and
mechanistically understanding their underlying architecture (Cammarata et al., 2020).
A common usage pattern for LLMs involves providing relevant contextual information alongside a
query. For example, in retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2021), documents from
an external datastore that are relevant to a given query are retrieved and are provided as part of the
LLM’s input. This allows LLMs to process data or make decisions based on information that is
not available in their pre-training dataset, which has proven critical to making LLMs applicable to a
wide range of use cases. While inspecting the documents retrieved by a RAG system can provide a
form of interpretability, LLMs generally provide no direct insight into which part of the augmented
context influenced the model’s generation. To address this shortcoming, context attribution methods
∗Work done at Vector Institute
1 https://github.com/r-three/AttriBoT
1
arXiv:2411.15102v3  [cs.LG]  21 Mar 2025

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Llama 8B
Llama 3B
Llama 1B
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Pearson Correlation with Llama 70B
0.944
0.923
0.882
Proxy Correlation with Llama 70B
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Sum of Sentence LOO Attributions
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Paragraph LOO Attribution
Pearson Correlation = 0.971
Paragraph Attribution vs. Sum of Sentence Attributions
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Number of Sources Kept
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Outlier Recall
Outlier Recall Achieved by Proxy Model Pruning
Llama 8B Proxy
Llama 3B Proxy
Llama 1B Proxy
Figure 1: We empirically test the assumptions underlying the AttriBoT’s underlying methods on ex-
amples from Hotpot QA. Left: The attribution scores of small proxy models ranging from 1B to 8B
parameters have high correlation with the attribution scores of a 70B-parameter target model, imply-
ing that the attributions from smaller models can be a reliable proxy for those from a target model.
Middle: Paragraph-level attribution scores correlate extremely well (R = 0.97) with the sum of the
sentence-level attribution scores in a given paragraph, suggesting that hierarchical attribution can
provide an effective means of pruning a large amount of irrelevant context. Right: Proxy models
can effectively prune contexts of unnecessary sources, achieving recall of 90% when keeping only
half of the sources in a context.
(Cohen-Wang et al., 2024; Yin & Neubig, 2022; Gao et al., 2023b) aim to quantify the influence of
each span of text in an LLM’s context on its generated output.
A natural approach for context attribution is to remove a span of text from the context and measure
the ensuing change in the likelihood of the model’s original response. This notion of importance,
known as the Leave-One-Out (LOO) error, is a common idea used in training data attribution (Koh
& Liang, 2020), data valuation (Choe et al., 2024), feature attribution (Li et al., 2017), and recently
for context attribution (Cohen-Wang et al., 2024). While the LOO error produces meaningful and
interpretable context attribution scores, it is often viewed as impractical due to the need to perform
an independent forward pass to score each text span in the context. This is particularly problematic
for modern LLMs whose forward passes are computationally expensive and realistic use cases often
involve long contexts with many text spans (e.g., sentences or paragraphs) to score.
In this work, we aim to show that LOO context attributions can be efficiently approximated at LLM
scale. To do so, we leverage the following observations:
1. Approximately half of the FLOPs needed to na¨ıvely compute LOO attributions are redundant and
can be avoided by caching the attention key and value tensors at each layer (Pope et al., 2022).
2. The sum of the LOO attributions for k contiguous text spans (e.g., sentences in a paragraph or
paragraphs in a section) are well-approximated by a single Leave-k-Out attribution score (Fig-
ure 1, middle).
3. The LOO attribution scores for a large model (e.g., 70B parameters) are well-approximated by
smaller models (e.g., 8B parameters) in the same model family (Figure 1, left and right).
These findings naturally lend themselves to efficient key-value caching schemes, novel hierarchical
approaches that prune low-information context chunks before performing attribution, and methods
that leverage small proxy LMs to approximate the LOO attributions of a larger target model. We
develop and explore the practical application of these schemes to develop an aggregate system called
AttriBoT (a Bag of Tricks for efficient context attribution). When evaluating AttriBoT in the open-
book question answering setting, where a model is presented a question with one or more related
documents provided in its context, we find that our methods significantly reduce the cost of comput-
ing LOO attributions – at times by >300× – while remaining more faithful to the original model’s
LOO error than a wide range of baselines. In addition, the cascade of approaches underlying Attri-
BoT can be naturally composed to attain a Pareto-optimal trade-off between efficiency and accuracy
over efficiencies ranging multiple orders of magnitude.
In the following section, we formalize the problem of context attribution, define the LOO error in
detail, and discuss the metrics we use to evaluate a given approximate attribution method’s faithful-
ness. Then, in Section 3, we detail our novel techniques for efficiently approximating LOO error,
2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
ultimately producing AttriBoT. Experimental results across multiple model families and datasets are
provided in Section 4.1, with related work in Section 5 and a conclusion in section 6.
2
PROBLEM STATEMENT
In this section, we introduce the problem of context attribution (Section 2.1), define the simple and
principled Leave-One-Out (LOO) error method for context attribution (Section 2.2), and define how
we evaluate approximate LOO attribution methods (Section 2.3).
Notation
Suppose that an autoregressive Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2023) language model (e.g.
Llama (Dubey et al., 2024), GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2024), etc.) generates a response R conditioned on a
query Q and a context C. For the purposes of this paper, we view a language model with parameters
θ as a function pθ(R|Q, C) that returns the probability of generating a response given a particular
query and context. Furthermore, we assume the context can be partitioned into a sequence of sources
with a partitioning function Π(C) = [si]N
i=1, where each source si is a contiguous chunk of text in
the context, like a sentence, paragraph, or document. For notational convenience, we define |C| to
be the number of sources in Π(C).
2.1
CONTEXT ATTRIBUTION
A large body of work on feature attribution has studied the relationship between a model’s predic-
tions and input features (Li et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2021). More recently, the problem of context
attribution, coined by Cohen-Wang et al. (2024), has been introduced as a special case of feature at-
tribution, where a response generated by an LLM is attributed back to parts of the LLM’s contextual
information.
Formally, we follow Cohen-Wang et al. (2024) and define a context attribution method as a function
τ(θ, R, s1, ..., s|C|) ∈R|C| that maps a language model’s parameters θ, response R, and sources
si ∈Π(C) to a vector of real-valued scores indicating each source’s importance to the model’s
response. While Cohen-Wang et al. (2024) leave the dependence of τ on θ and R implicit, we make
this dependence explicit because we will later explore algorithms where multiple models are used
and may be fed other models’ responses.
2.2
LEAVE-ONE-OUT ATTRIBUTION
There are many notions of what makes a source important that each lead to different choices of τ.
Perhaps the simplest and most interpretable notion of importance is that important sources lead to
large changes in the likelihood of the model’s response when they are removed from the original
context. This quantity, often referred to as the Leave-One-Out (LOO) error, leads to the following
choice of context attribution function, which we refer to as the “LOO attribution” in the remainder
of the paper:
τLOO(θ, R, s1, ..., s|C|)i = log pθ(R|Q, C) −log pθ(R|Q, C \ {si})
(1)
In practice, LOO attributions can be impractical to compute for particularly large language models
since scoring all |C| sources in the context requires |C| + 1 forward passes of the language model –
one pass to compute the likelihood of the response given the full context and |C| passes to compute
the likelihood with each of the |C| sources individually removed from the context. In realistic
settings where models are provided with a large amount of contextual information (i.e. |C| is very
large), computing LOO attributions for all sources in a context can be orders of magnitude more
expensive than generating the response itself. Thus, the remainder of this paper explores a variety
of methods for efficiently approximating τLOO.
2.3
EVALUATING APPROXIMATE LEAVE-ONE-OUT ATTRIBUTIONS
Much past work on intrepretability and attribution measures performance in terms of how well a
given method matches human annotations of source importance. Our focus is instead on efficiently
approximating the attributions of a “target” LLM whose LOO attributions are prohibitively expen-
sive to compute. We therefore introduce a straightforward evaluation procedure for measuring effi-
3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Method
Method Parameters
Theoretical FLOPs
Speedup over LOO
LOO
N/A
2PT|C|(|C| −1)
1
KV Caching
N/A
PT|C|(|C| −1)
2
Proxy
P ′ : Proxy model size
2P ′T|C|(|C| −1)
P
P ′
Pruning
P ′ : Proxy model size
α : Fraction of sources
2PT|C|((α2 + P ′
P )|C| −α −P ′
P )
P (|C|−1)
(α2P +P ′)|C|−αP −P ′
Hierarchical
H : Sources per group
β : Fraction of groups
2PT|C|((β2 + 1
H )|C| −β −1)
H(|C|−1)
(β2H+1)|C|−βH−H
Table 1: The theoretical number of floating-point operations (FLOPs) needed by different methods
to compute LOO attributions expressed in terms of P, the number of target model parameters, T,
the number of tokens per source, and C, the number of context sources.
ciency and determining how faithful an approximate method’s attributions are to those produced by
the original target model.
Approximation Error
Past work has found that for many real-world tasks like summarization and
question answering, attributions tend to be sparse, meaning that only a small number of sources in
the context significantly influence a model’s response (Liu et al., 2024; Kuratov et al., 2024; Yang
et al., 2018). Thus, when evaluating how well an algorithm approximates LOO attributions, we are
primarily interested in how well the algorithm recovers these few highly contributive sources.
To evaluate approximate LOO attribution methods we first compute the LOO attributions of the tar-
get model and identify the most contributive sources. We consider a source to be highly contributive
if it has an outlyingly large score. To find outlier scores, we apply the Generalized Extreme Studen-
tized Deviate (ESD) test (Rosner, 1983), a statistical test that returns the outlier values in a collection
of data (for more details, see Appendix B.2). We denote the number of detected outlier sources for
a given example as nout.
We then test the extent to which approximate LOO attribution methods recover these nout out-
lier sources using evaluation metrics from information retrieval. In particular, we rank the sources
according to their approximate LOO attribution scores and measure the mean Average Precision
(mAP) over examples in a dataset (Manning et al., 2008).
Efficiency
For each approximate LOO algorithm, we report its practical and theoretical efficiency.
To measure practical efficiency, we report the average GPU-seconds needed to compute attribution
scores for all sources in a context. For theoretical efficiency, we estimate the number of floating-
point operations (FLOPs) needed to compute attributions as a function of the number of model
parameters P, the number of sources in the context |C|, the number of tokens in each source T,
and any other method-specific parameters. To estimate FLOPs, we use the simplifying assumptions
from Kaplan et al. (2020) and Hoffmann et al. (2022), i.e. that performing a forward pass for a
P-parameter language model on T tokens requires approximately 2PT FLOPs.
3
ACCELERATING LEAVE-ONE-OUT ATTRIBUTION WITH ATTRIBOT
In this section, we describe the Bag of Tricks that AttriBoT uses to efficiently compute approx-
imate LOO attributions. For each method, we provide intuition for why it serves as an effective
approximation to the LOO error as well as discussion on its theoretical speedup over standard LOO
attribution using the target model. Full details on the efficiency gains for each method can be found
in Table 1 with derivations available in Appendix A.
3.1
KEY-VALUE CACHING
For a context containing |C| sources, computing τLOO requires |C| + 1 forward passes (including
the first forward pass to generate the response). However, much of this computation is redundant
when the underlying language model is an autoregressive Transformer. At each self-attention layer
4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
in an autoregressive Transformer, the key and value tensors for a given position in the sequence are
only a function of previous tokens due to autoregressivity or causal masking (Vaswani et al., 2023).
Thus, if two inputs share a prefix, the key and value tensors at each position in the prefix will be
identical. This redundant computation can be avoided by caching the key and value tensors at each
layer and reusing the cached values for inputs that have a previously computed prefix (Pope et al.,
2022).
Specifically, when computing LOO attributions, the keys and values can be cached for the full se-
quence of tokens while computing pθ(R|Q, C). Then, for each subsequent forward pass computing
pθ(R|Q, C \ {si}), the cached keys and values for Q and the first i −1 sources in C can be reused.
In aggregate over all sources, this avoids computation for a total of (|C| −1)/2 sources, ultimately
saving approximately half of the FLOPs used to compute τLOO. Notably, ignoring differences due
to numerical error of floating point operations, we should expect KV caching to be lossless – i.e.,
LOO attributions should be the same regardless of whether KV caching is used.
3.2
HIERARCHICAL ATTRIBUTION
In many settings, we expect that the context has a hierarchical nature – for example, the context
might comprise a sequence of paragraphs that can each be broken down into a sequence of sentences.
This structure can be leveraged to efficiently identify sources that are likely to have high LOO
attributions, allowing us to avoid computing τLOO for every source in the context.
Imagine we want to compute LOO attributions at the sentence level. The key assumption underlying
our hierarchical attribution algorithm is that the sum of the LOO attributions for k sentences in
a paragraph can be closely approximated by a single Leave-k-out attribution score computed by
removing the paragraph as a whole. In cases where this holds, paragraphs whose removal incurs a
large drop in the response’s likelihood are also likely to contain highly contributive sentences.
Specifically, to perform hierarchical attribution we assume the context can be partitioned into a
sequence of “source groups” (e.g., paragraphs) Πg(C) = [Gi]M
i=1 and each of these groups can
be further decomposed into its constituent sources (e.g., sentences) Πs(Gi) = [sj]Mi
j=1, where Mi
is the number of sentences in group Gi. We first compute the LOO error for each source group,
τLOO(θ, R, Gi, . . . , GM), and keep only a fraction, β, of the groups with the highest scores. From
these high-attribution groups, we construct a shortened context ˆC comprising only the retained
groups and compute τLOO(θ, R, s1, . . . , s| ˆ
C|) for the sources si ∈Πs( ˆC).
For example, when processing a document with 10 paragraphs and using β = 0.2, we would first
compute the LOO error corresponding to the removal each of the paragraphs and retain the two
paragraphs with the highest LOO score. Finally, to compute attributions for the sentences in these
two paragraphs, we concatenate the paragraphs into a truncated context and compute the LOO error
incurred by removing each sentence from the truncated context.
This hierarchical approach achieves a speedup over LOO by (1) first doing fewer forward passes
over the full context when computing attributions at the source group level and (2) doing fewer for-
ward passes on a shortened context after the low-attribution source groups are removed. With the
simplifying assumption that each source group contains H sources, if we keep only a constant num-
ber source groups irrespective of the total number of sources (i.e. β ∼1/|C|), then this method’s
speedup over LOO is approximately H for long contexts.
3.3
PROXY MODELING
The high cost of computing the LOO error stems from having to compute |C| forward passes through
a large and computationally expensive language model. The cost of each of these forward passes
is naturally cheaper for smaller models. If a smaller “proxy” model’s attributions are faithful to
a larger target model whose attributions we hope to obtain, this raises the possibility of reducing
the cost of computing LOO attributions by using the proxy model instead. In particular, we might
hope that a smaller model from the same model family (i.e. sharing a model architecture, training
dataset, and training objective but differing in its parameter count) produces similar attributions to
a target model. Specifically, we take the response R generated by the target model, and use the
approximation τLOO(θproxy, R, s1, . . . , s|C|) ≈τLOO(θ, R, s1, . . . , s|C|). The proxy model does
5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
not need to produce the response, but rather emulate the conditional likelihood of the target model’s
response given a context. In practice, as further discussed in section 4.2.1, we find that when using
the target model’s response to compute attribution scores, the LOO errors from a target model are
highly correlated with those from a small proxy model from the target model.
3.4
PROXY MODEL PRUNING
While small proxy models can approximate the context attributions of larger target models rea-
sonably well, one way to improve the fidelity of this approximation is to use the proxy model
to prune away low-attribution sources and then re-score the remaining sources with the target
model.
Specifically, we take the response generated by the target model, use it to compute
τLOO(θproxy, R, s1, . . . , s|C|), and keep only a fraction, α, of the highest scoring sources. Then
we reconstitute the context keeping only these top sources and recompute their LOO attributions
using the target model.
Compared to simply using a proxy model, this method is more expensive since it requires forward
passes of the target model for each of the non-pruned spans. However, this extra compute is spent
improving the approximation error for the high-attribution sources whose LOO attributions are most
important to recover accurately. If the number of sources kept after pruning is constant (i.e. α ∼
1/|C|), then this method provides a speedup of roughly P/P ′ for long contexts, the same speedup
achieved by proxy modeling alone.
3.5
COMPOSING METHODS IN THE ATTRIBOT BAG OF TRICKS
The methods described above improve the efficiency of computing LOO attributions by avoiding
redundant calculations during forward passes, reducing the size of the model used to perform the
forward passes, and/or reducing the total number of forward passes. As different methods target
different factors that make exact LOO computation expensive, these methods can often be com-
posed together to achieve even greater efficiency. Concretely, in addition to the individual methods
described previously, we test the following composite methods in our experiments: KV Caching +
Hierarchical Attribution, KV Caching + Proxy Modeling, KV Caching + Proxy Model Pruning, and
KV Caching + Proxy Modeling + Hierarchical Attribution.
4
EXPERIMENTS
To validate AttriBoT, we compare its efficiency and faithfulness to a range of baseline context at-
tribution methods. Our focus is on confirming that our approximations provide a Pareto-optimal
trade-off between speed and faithfulness to the target model.
4.1
SETUP
In this section, we describe the models, datasets, and baseline methods used to evaluate AttriBoT,
as well as the computational resources used to run our experiments.
4.1.1
MODELS
To ensure that AttriBoT is valuable in state-of-the-art settings, we focus on recent performant open
LLMs. We therefore experiment with two target models whose LOO context attributions we aim to
efficiently approximate: the 70B-parameter instruction-tuned LLM from the Llama 3.1 model family
(Dubey et al., 2024) and the 72B-parameter instruction-tuned LLM from the Qwen 2.5 model family
(Yang et al., 2024). As proxy models, we use smaller instruction-tuned models from each of these
model families. For Llama 70B, this includes the 8B-parameter model from the Llama 3.1 family
and the 1B and 3B-parameter models from the Llama 3.2 family. For Qwen 72B, we use the 0.5B,
1.5B, 3B, 7B, and 32B-parameter models from the Qwen 2.5 model family as proxies. Each model
within a given family shares an architecture, pre-training objective, and pre-training dataset. We
report results for the Llama models in the main text and replicate select experiments with the Qwen
models in Appendix C.
6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
4.1.2
DATASETS
There are a number of applications of context attribution that range from verifying faithfulness of
model summaries to detecting malicious prompts. In this study, we focus on the well-studied and
widespread setting of open-book question answering (OBQA), which involves prompting a model
to answer a question that is supported by a provided context. Since many tasks can be formulated
as answering a question about contextual information (McCann et al., 2018), we expect results
on OBQA to be a reliable indicator of performance in other settings. Given that each method’s
efficiency depends on the context length, we consider datasets covering a range of context lengths.
To this end, we focus on three open-book QA datasets:
1. SQuAD 2.0 (Rajpurkar et al., 2018): A reading comprehension benchmark where a model is
presented a question along with a Wikipedia article containing the answer. For this dataset, we
consider sources to be individual sentences in the context and source groups for hierarchical
attribution to be paragraphs.
2. HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018): A multi-hop question answering benchmark that requires reason-
ing across paragraphs from multiple Wikipedia pages, as well as ignoring distractor paragraphs,
in order to answer a question. For this dataset, we consider sources to be individual sentences in
the context and source groups for hierarchical methods to be paragraphs.
3. QASPER (Dasigi et al., 2021): A document-grounded, information-seeking question answering
dataset where each context is a natural language processing paper. Answering questions in the
QASPER dataset requires complex reasoning about claims made in multiple parts of a paper. For
this dataset, we consider sources to be paragraphs and source groups for hierarchical methods to
be sections of the paper provided in the context.
For more details on these datasets, see Appendix B.1.
4.1.3
BASELINES
We compare AttriBoT’s performance to a diverse set of context attribution methods:
1. Attention Weights: The self-attention operation in the Transformer architecture provides an im-
plicit way of determining which input entries are influential (Jain & Wallace, 2019; Wiegreffe &
Pinter, 2019). Concretely, we compute the total attention weight for each source by summing the
attention weights of a source’s tokens across all attention heads and layers.
2. Gradient Norm: The gradient of the model’s response likelihood with respect to its input provides
a first-order approximation of the model’s sensitivity input perturbations, and thus is a useful in-
terpretation technique (Yin & Neubig, 2022; Mohebbi et al., 2021). Specifically, we calculate the
Frobenius norm of the gradient of the response’s likelihood with respect to the token embeddings
of each source.
3. Sentence embedding similarity: As a simple model-agnostic baseline, we compute the similar-
ity between sentence embeddings for the generated response and each one of the sources. We
generate sentence embeddings using the all-MiniLM-L6-v2 SentenceBERT model (Reimers &
Gurevych, 2019) and compute similarity via cosine similarity.
4. ContextCite: This method estimates the importance of each context source by training a linear
surrogate model to estimate the likelihood of a response given a set of context sources. The
trained linear model’s weights for each source in the context act as an attribution score (Cohen-
Wang et al., 2024). More background on ContextCite is provided in in Appendix B.3.
For more details on baseline methods, see Appendix B.3.
4.1.4
COMPUTATIONAL RESOURCES
All experiments were run on servers with 4 NVIDIA A100 SXM4 GPUs with 80GB of VRAM. For
experiments involving models with fewer than 15 billion parameters, we use only a single GPU. For
models with more parameters, we use model parallelism across multiple GPUs.
7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
10−2
10−1
100
Examples per GPU-second
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Mean Average Precision
SQuAD
10−2
10−1
100
Examples per GPU-second
Hotpot QA
10−2
10−1
100
Examples per GPU-second
QASPER
Exact LOO
AttriBoT
Pareto Front
KV
HR + KV
Prune + KV
Proxy + KV
HR + Proxy + KV
Baselines
Sentence Similarity
Gradient Norm
Attention Weights
ContextCite
Figure 2: We plot the mean average precision compared to attributions of the target model against
the GPU time for AttriBoT and a variety of baselines using Llama 3.1 70B Instruct as the target
model and smaller Llama instruct variants as proxy models. Across all three datasets, AttriBoT is
consistently Pareto-optimal over multiple orders of magnitude.
4.2
RESULTS
We now provide empirical results that motivate the approximations made in AttriBoT and demon-
strate its effectiveness in the OBQA setting.
4.2.1
VALIDATING ATTRIBOT’S APPROXIMATIONS
Hierarchical Attribution
The assumption underlying our hierarchical attribution method is that
the sum of the LOO scores for k sources in a source group (e.g., sentences in a paragraph) can be
estimated by computing the Leave-k-Out attribution of the source group as a whole. We empirically
test this assumption for Llama 70B by comparing LOO attributions for all paragraphs in HotpotQA
with the sum each paragraph’s sentence-level LOO attributions. Figure 1 (Middle) shows that the
these two quantities have a very high Pearson correlation (R = 0.97), meaning that the removal of
low-attribution source groups in our proposed hierarchical attribution method is likely to keep most
high-attribution sources.
Proxy Modeling
Proxy modeling assumes that two models from the same model family will have
similar LOO attributions. Thus, if the target model is large, its LOO attributions for a particular
response can be efficiently approximated by attributing the same response with a smaller proxy
model. We test this claim by measuring the correlation between the HotpotQA sentence-level at-
tribution scores from Llama 70B and smaller proxy models from the Llama model family, ranging
from 1B to 8B parameters. We find that LOO attributions from each of the proxy models are very
well correlated with the Llama 70B’s LOO attributions. Shown in Figure 1 (Left) the Pearson corre-
lation is as high as 0.94 for the largest proxy model with 8B parameters and only decreases to 0.88
for the smallest 1B-parameter proxy model.
Proxy Model Pruning
Like proxy modeling, proxy model pruning assumes that small models
can capably approximating a large model’s attributions. However, pruning additionally requires the
proxy model to rank outlier sources as one of the top-α|C| sources. In practice we find this to be the
case. Figure 1 (Right) plots the outlier recall of different proxy models as a function of the number
of sources kept when pruning a context. In practice, we find that Llama 8B achieves 85% recall of
sources with outlier Llama 70B attributions while only keeping the top-10 spans.
4.2.2
ATTRIBOT’S PARETO-OPTIMALITY
Our main results, comparing AttriBoT to the baselines listed in Section 4.1.3 on the datasets de-
scribed in Section 4.1.2 for the Llama model family, are provided in Figure 2. We find that the tech-
niques composed in AttriBoT produce a Pareto-optimal method across many orders of magnitude
of costs on all three of our evaluation datasets. Compared to ContextCite, the only other method we
are aware of that computes attributions via repeated forward passes on modified contexts, AttriBoT
can provide attributions that are equally faithful to a target model’s LOO attributions with orders
of magnitude lower cost. Compared to cheaper attribution baselines (sentence similarity, gradient
norm, and attention weights), AttriBoT remains Pareto-optimal and can even be more efficient than
8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
using sentence embeddings (which are produced by a small model and do not require any forward
passes of a target or proxy model). These results hold true across all datasets, demonstrating that
AttriBoT scales well to datasets of varying context length.
KV Caching
We find that, in practice, KV caching offers about a 1.6× speedup over computing
exact LOO attributions while, as expected, nearly perfectly recovering outlier sources (see Figure 3.
While in theory computing attributions with and without KV caching should be identical, in prac-
tice we observe a small difference in the attribution values due to accumulated numerical error of
floating-point operations.
Proxy Modeling
Shown in Figure 3, proxy modeling can be an effective approach for greatly
speeding up LOO computation. We find that as the size of the proxy model decreases, its faithfulness
to the exact LOO attributions also decreases. However, the faithfulness of attributions from smaller
models still remains better than many baselines that use orders of magnitude more compute.
Hierarchical Attribution
In Figure 4, we show the accuracy vs. efficiency trade-off of hierar-
chical attribution. We find that modulating the fraction of source groups retained, β, is an effective
method for trading off accuracy for efficiency. Additionally, we find that using the target model
yields the most accurate attributions, while substituting the target model for a smaller proxy model
achieves greater efficiency.
Proxy Model Pruning
Like hierarchical attribution, we show in Figure 5 that modulating the frac-
tion of sources to retain, α, and the proxy model size effectively trades off accuracy for efficiency.
4.2.3
ATTRIBOT’S IMPACT ON MATCHING HUMAN ANNOTATIONS
Our main focus has been on efficiently approximating the attributions of a target model. However,
it can also be valuable to measure how closely an attribution method matches human-annotated
“important” spans. Such annotations are available for the HotpotQA dataset, so we additionally
evaluated the impact of using AttriBoT on agreement with human annotations. Full results are
in Appendix C.4; as a short summary, we find that the methods introduced in AttriBoT actually
remain more faithful to the human-annotated attributions than they do to those of the target model.
Concretely, we observe that AttriBoT can achieve a 300× speed up with only 10% drop in mAP.
5
RELATED WORK
Generating Citations
Computing LOO context attributions involves repeated inference of the
target model. In contrast, past work has explored whether it is possible to train LLMs to directly
provide citations to sources or spans from their context (Weller et al., 2024; Gao et al., 2023b).
Some approaches leverage pipelines for retrieving external facts to ground and verify a generated
response while providing explicit attribution (Asai et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024b; Sun et al., 2023; Li
et al., 2024a; Chen et al., 2024; Huo et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2023a). Other models are explicitly
trained to produce citations, including GopherCite (Menick et al., 2022), which generates quotes
from supporting documents after generating a response; LaMDA (Thoppilan et al., 2022), which
provides URLs from the information retrieval system used; and WebGPT (Nakano et al., 2022),
which provides extracted context from the source webpages. Such citation generation methods only
provide insight how each statement is possibly supported by the corresponding source instead of
measuring how each source contributes to a response via a causal intervention like source removal.
Therefore, while useful for providing evidence for supporting or verifying an LLM’s response, these
methods cannot necessarily provide insight into why an LLM produced a particular output.
While one goal of this line of work is to improve the factuality and reduce hallucinations of LLMs,
whether such citations can themselves be considered trustworthy is unclear (Peskoff & Stewart,
2023; Zuccon et al., 2023; Gravel et al., 2023). In fact, previous work has explored generative
search engines like Bing Chat, NeevaAI, perplexity.ai, and YouChat that provide inline citations,
and find that they frequently contain unsupported statements and inaccurate citations (Liu et al.,
2023).
9

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Feature Attribution-Based Explanations
The field of neural network interpretability has put
forth a huge number of techniques that aim to measure the importance or relevance of each input
feature on a model’s prediction. Perturbation-based techniques including leave-one-out and masking
have been applied on features like words and phrases (Li et al., 2016), input word-vector dimensions,
intermediate hidden units (Li et al., 2017), and token spans (Wu et al., 2021). The gradient of a
model’s output with respect to an input feature indicates the sensitivity of output to input changes
and has therefore been used to compute attribution scores (Yin & Neubig, 2022; Mohebbi et al.,
2021; Sanyal & Ren, 2021; Sikdar et al., 2021; Enguehard, 2023). We adapted this simple gradient-
based attribution approach as one of our baselines. Since attention computes an adaptively weighted
average of activations, attention weights can be seen as capturing the correlation between inputs.
Attention weights have therefore also been a popular tool to identify important information to the
model (Pruthi et al., 2020a; Serrano & Smith, 2019; Wiegreffe & Pinter, 2019) and we therefore use
attention weight as one of our baselines. Local interpretable surrogate models are also developed to
interpret model outputs (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Lundberg & Lee, 2017).
Attributing Predictions to Training Data
Apart from attributing an LLM’s predictions to input
features that correspond to elements in its context, it can be of practical interest to uncover the
training data that influenced a particular prediction. Such is the goal of influence functions (Koh &
Liang, 2020), which estimate the impact of removing a particular training example by computing the
alignment of gradients through a bilinear form with the inverse Hessian. The high cost of computing
and inverting the Hessian, as well as the cost of computing gradients for every in example within
a potentially gargantuan training dataset, has led to a great deal of work on computing influence
functions more efficiently, particularly for LLMs (Grosse et al., 2023; Choe et al., 2024; Pruthi
et al., 2020b). Apart from costs, the reliability of influence functions has been questioned (Basu
et al., 2021; Bae et al., 2022). As exact LOO for dataset attribution requires a full training run for
each data point, most training data attribution methods resort to evaluating with proxy metrics like
task accuracy as a function of the number of high-attribution training examples removed, instead of
ground truth LOO attributions as in our work. Beyond directly measuring influence, other works
have sought to understand the influence of pre-training data on factual knowledge internalized by
the model (Kandpal et al., 2023; Chang et al., 2024; Razeghi et al., 2022; Antoniades et al., 2024).
More broadly, the impact of pre-training data on LLM behavior and performance is an important
notion for the well-studied problem of data selection; see (Albalak et al., 2024).
6
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced AttriBoT, a Bag of Tricks for efficiently attributing an LLM’s predic-
tions to spans of text in its input context. AttiBoT leverages a series of novel techniques for approx-
imating the attributions of a large target model, including reusing computations through key-value
caching, performing hierarchical attributions to reduce the number of forward passes, and leverag-
ing a smaller proxy model whose attributions reliably approximate those of the target model. Taken
together, AttriBoT can provide a >300× speedup, making attributing a response 30× more efficient
than even generating a response in realistic settings, while remaining more faithful to the target
model’s attributions than prior methods for efficient context attribution. In addition, the components
of AttriBoT can be included, excluded, and tuned to produce a Pareto-optimal trade-off between
faithfulness and speed. While our experimental results primarily focus on the general setting of
open-book question answering, we anticipate AttriBoT will also be useful for detecting malicious
prompts and model hallucinations. We hope that our efficient and easy-to-use implementation of
AttriBoT1 ensures that it has real-world impact and also enables future work on efficient context
attribution.
7
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Haokun Liu, Brian Lester, Wanru Zhao, and the members of Vector Institute for their valu-
able feedback and support. Resources used in preparing this research were provided, in part, by the
Province of Ontario, the Government of Canada through CIFAR, and companies sponsoring the Vec-
tor Institute https://vectorinstitute.ai/partnerships/current-partners/.
10

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
REFERENCES
Alon Albalak, Yanai Elazar, Sang Michael Xie, Shayne Longpre, Nathan Lambert, Xinyi Wang,
Niklas Muennighoff, Bairu Hou, Liangming Pan, Haewon Jeong, Colin Raffel, Shiyu Chang,
Tatsunori Hashimoto, and William Yang Wang. A survey on data selection for language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.16827, 2024.
Antonis Antoniades, Xinyi Wang, Yanai Elazar, Alfonso Amayuelas, Alon Albalak, Kexun Zhang,
and William Yang Wang. Generalization vs memorization: Tracing language models’ capabilities
back to pretraining data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.14985, 2024.
Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-rag: Learning to
retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11511, 2023.
Juhan Bae, Nathan Ng, Alston Lo, Marzyeh Ghassemi, and Roger Grosse. If influence functions
are the answer, then what is the question? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2022.
Samyadeep Basu, Phil Pope, and Soheil Feizi. Influence functions in deep learning are fragile. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Nick Cammarata, Shan Carter, Gabriel Goh, Chris Olah, Michael Petrov, Ludwig Schubert, Chelsea
Voss, Ben Egan, and Swee Kiat Lim. Thread: Circuits. Distill, 2020.
Hoyeon Chang, Jinho Park, Seonghyeon Ye, Sohee Yang, Youngkyung Seo, Du-Seong Chang, and
Minjoon Seo.
How do large language models acquire factual knowledge during pretraining?
arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11813, 2024.
Jifan Chen, Grace Kim, Aniruddh Sriram, Greg Durrett, and Eunsol Choi. Complex claim verifi-
cation with evidence retrieved in the wild. In Kevin Duh, Helena Gomez, and Steven Bethard
(eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2024.
Sang Keun Choe, Hwijeen Ahn, Juhan Bae, Kewen Zhao, Minsoo Kang, Youngseog Chung, Adithya
Pratapa, Willie Neiswanger, Emma Strubell, Teruko Mitamura, Jeff Schneider, Eduard Hovy,
Roger Grosse, and Eric Xing. What is your data worth to gpt? llm-scale data valuation with
influence functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.13954, 2024.
Benjamin Cohen-Wang, Harshay Shah, Kristian Georgiev, and Aleksander Madry. Contextcite:
Attributing model generation to context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.00729, 2024.
Pradeep Dasigi, Kyle Lo, Iz Beltagy, Arman Cohan, Noah A. Smith, and Matt Gardner. A dataset of
information-seeking questions and answers anchored in research papers. In Kristina Toutanova,
Anna Rumshisky, Luke Zettlemoyer, Dilek Hakkani-Tur, Iz Beltagy, Steven Bethard, Ryan Cot-
terell, Tanmoy Chakraborty, and Yichao Zhou (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, 2021.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha
Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony
Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark,
Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Roziere,
Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris
Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong,
Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny
Livshits, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino,
Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael
Smith, Filip Radenovic, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Ander-
son, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah
Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan
Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Ma-
hadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy
11

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak,
Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Al-
wala, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini,
Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der
Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo,
Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Man-
nat Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova,
Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal,
Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Olivier Duchenne, Onur
C¸ elebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhar-
gava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong,
Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic,
Roberta Raileanu, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sum-
baly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa,
Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang,
Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende,
Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney
Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom,
Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta,
Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vladan Petro-
vic, Weiwei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang,
Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur,
Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre
Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aaron Grattafiori, Abha
Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay
Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alex Vaughan, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein, Amanda
Kallet, Amit Sangani, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Alvarado, Andrew Caples, Andrew
Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani, Annie Franco, Aparajita
Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh
Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De
Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Bran-
don Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina
Mejia, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai,
Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li,
Danny Wyatt, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana
Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le, Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil,
Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily Hahn, Emily Wood, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Ar-
caute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco
Caggioni, Francisco Guzm´an, Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella
Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee, Gil Halpern, Govind Thattai, Grant Herman, Grigory
Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang,
Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Gold-
man, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman,
James Geboski, James Kohli, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer
Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe
Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie
Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Karthik Prasad, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun
Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kun Huang, Kunal
Chawla, Kushal Lakhotia, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva,
Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian
Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson,
Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Ke-
neally, Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel
Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert
