URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2108.00573
Type: PDF
Length: 63722 chars (truncated)

--- Content ---

 MuSiQue: Multihop Questions via Single-hop Question Composition
Harsh Trivedi⋄
Niranjan Balasubramanian⋄
Tushar Khot†
Ashish Sabharwal†
⋄Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, U.S.A.
{hjtrivedi,niranjan}@cs.stonybrook.edu
†Allen Institute for AI, Seattle, U.S.A.
{tushark,ashishs}@allenai.org
Abstract
Multihop reasoning remains an elusive goal
as existing multihop benchmarks are known
to be largely solvable via shortcuts.
Can
we create a question answering (QA) dataset
that, by construction, requires proper multi-
hop reasoning? To this end, we introduce a
bottom-up approach that systematically se-
lects composable pairs of single-hop ques-
tions that are connected, i.e., where one rea-
soning step critically relies on information
from another.
This bottom-up methodol-
ogy lets us explore a vast space of ques-
tions and add stringent ﬁlters as well as
other mechanisms targeting connected rea-
soning. It provides ﬁne-grained control over
the construction process and the properties
of the resulting k-hop questions.
We use
this methodology to create MuSiQue-Ans,
a new multihop QA dataset with 25K 2-4
hop questions. Relative to existing datasets,
MuSiQue-Ans is more difﬁcult overall (3x
increase in human-machine gap), and harder
to cheat via disconnected reasoning (e.g., a
single-hop model has a 30 point drop in F1).
We further add unanswerable contrast ques-
tions to produce a more stringent dataset,
MuSiQue-Full. We hope our datasets will
help the NLP community develop models
that perform genuine multihop reasoning.1
1
Introduction
Multihop QA datasets are designed to support the
development and evaluation of models that per-
form multiple steps of reasoning in order to an-
swer a question. Recent work, however, shows
that on existing datasets, models often need not
even connect information across all supporting
facts,2 because they can exploit reasoning short-
cuts and other artifacts to ﬁnd the correct answers
1Code and datasets available at https://github.
com/stonybrooknlp/musique.
2For example, they often don’t even use information from
one supporting fact to select another.
Armageddon in Retrospect was written
by the author who was best
known for what novel?
Slaughterhouse-Five
Who's the author of
Armageddon in Retrospect?
A1: Kurt Vonnegut
What novel was A1 best 
known for?
A2: Slaughterhouse-Five
Armageddon in Retrospect was written
by the author who was best known
for what 1969 satire novel?
Slaughterhouse-Five
Who's the author of
Armageddon in Retrospect?
A1': Kurt Vonnegut
What 1969 satire novel was A1'
best known for?
A2': Slaughterhouse-Five
Q1'
Q2'
Q1
Q2
Q'
Q
Connected Question
Disconnected Question
Armageddon in Retrospect is ... written by Kurt Vonnegut.
The Book of Satyrlike Adventures is ... written by Gaius Petronius.
Kurt Vonnegut ... most famous for satirical novel Slaughterhouse-Five (1969).
Jaroslav Hašek ... is best known for his novel "The Good Soldier Švejk".
Harper Lee ... is best known for her novel "To Kill a Mockingbird"
Context
Figure 1: Generating connected multihop questions by
composing carefully chosen pairs of single-hop ques-
tions. Left: A HotpotQA question that would have
been ﬁltered out by our approach for not requiring
connected reasoning; it can be answered using just
Q2 without knowing the answer to Q1 (since there is
only one person mentioned in the context as being best
known for a satirical novel). Right: A connected ques-
tion that forces models to reason through both intended
hops (since there are multiple people mentioned in the
context as being best known for some novel).
and obtain high scores (Min et al., 2019a; Chen
and Durrett, 2019; Trivedi et al., 2020).
Such
shortcuts arise from various factors, such as overly
speciﬁc sub-questions, train-test leakage, and in-
sufﬁcient distractors.
These factors allow mod-
els to circumvent connected reasoning—they need
not read the context to ﬁnd answers to previous
sub-question(s) or use these answers to answer the
later sub-questions that depend on them.
The left hand side of Fig. 1 illustrates an in-
stance of this problem in an actual question (Q)
taken from the HotpotQA dataset (Yang et al.,
2018). This question has the over-speciﬁcation is-
sue. At ﬁrst glance, it appears to require a model to
identify Kurt Vonnegut as the author of Armaged-
don in Retrospect, and then use this information to
answer the ﬁnal question about the famous satire
novel he authored. However, this framing of the
arXiv:2108.00573v3  [cs.CL]  5 May 2022

question is insufﬁcient to enforce that models must
perform connected multihop reasoning to arrive at
the correct answer. A model can, in fact, ﬁnd the
correct answer to this question from the context
without ﬁnding the answer to Q1. This is because,
even if a model does not know that A1 refers to
Kurt Vonnegut, there happens to be only one per-
son best known for a satirical novel mentioned in
the context.
Contrast this with the question on the right (Q’),
which cannot be answered by simply returning a
novel that someone was best known for. There are
three possible answers in the context and choosing
between them requires knowing which author is
referenced. This is a desirable multihop question
that requires connected reasoning.
Prior work has characterized such reasoning,
where a model arrives at the correct answer
without using all supporting facts, as Discon-
nected Reasoning (Trivedi et al., 2020).
While
this characterization enables ﬁltering or automati-
cally transforming existing datasets (Trivedi et al.,
2020), we ask a different question: How can we
construct a new multihop dataset that, by design,
enforces connected reasoning?
We make two main contributions towards this:
1) A new dataset construction approach:
We introduce a bottom-up process for build-
ing challenging multihop reading comprehension
QA datasets by carefully selecting and compos-
ing single-hop questions obtained from existing
datasets. The key ideas behind our approach are:
(i) Composing multihop questions from a large
collection of single-hop questions, which allows
a systematic exploration of a vast space of candi-
date multihop questions. (ii) Applying a stringent
set of ﬁlters that ensure no sub-question can be an-
swered without ﬁnding the answer to the previous
sub-questions it is connected to (a key property
we formally deﬁne as part of the MuSiQue condi-
tion, Eqn. (2)). (iii) Reducing train-test leakage at
the level of each single-hop question, thereby mit-
igating the impact of simple memorization tricks.
(iv) Adding distractor contexts that cannot be eas-
ily identiﬁed. (v) Creating unanswerable multihop
questions at the sub-question level.
2) A new challenge dataset and empiri-
cal analysis:
We build a new multihop QA
dataset, MuSiQue-Ans (abbreviated as  -Ans),
with ∼25K 2-4 hop questions with six differ-
ent composition structures (cf. Table 1).
We
demonstrate that  -Ans is more challenging and
less cheatable than two prior multihop reasoning
datasets, HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018) and 2Wiki-
MultihopQA (Ho et al., 2020).
In particular, it
has 3x the human-machine gap, and a substan-
tially lower disconnected reasoning (DiRe) score
which captures the extent to which a dataset can be
cheated via disconnected reasoning (Trivedi et al.,
2020). We also show how various features of our
dataset construction pipeline help increase dataset
difﬁculty and reduce cheatability. Lastly, by in-
corporating the notion of insufﬁcient context (Ra-
jpurkar et al., 2018; Trivedi et al., 2020), we also
release a variant of our dataset,  -Full, having
∼50K multihop questions which form contrasting
pairs (Kaushik et al., 2019; Gardner et al., 2020) of
answerable and unanswerable questions.  -Full
is even more challenging and harder to cheat on.
We hope our bottom-up multihop dataset
construction methodology and our challenging
datasets with a mixed number of hops will help
develop proper multihop reasoning systems and
decomposition-based models.
2
Related Work
Multihop QA.
 -Ans is closest to HotpotQA
(Yang et al., 2018) and 2WikiMultihopQA (Ho
et al., 2020).
HotpotQA was constructed by
directly crowdsourcing 2-hop questions without
considering the difﬁculty of composition and has
been shown to be largely solvable without multi-
hop reasoning (Min et al., 2019a; Chen and Dur-
rett, 2019; Trivedi et al., 2020).
While 2Wiki-
MultihopQA was also constructed via composi-
tion, they use a limited set of hand-authored com-
positional rules, making it easy for large language
models. We show that  -Ans is harder and less
cheatable than both of these.
Other multihop
datasets (Khashabi et al., 2018; Dua et al., 2019,
inter alia) focus on different challenges such as
multiple modalitites (Chen et al., 2020; Talmor
et al., 2021), open-domain QA (Geva et al., 2021;
Khot et al., 2020), fact veriﬁcation (Jiang et al.,
2020), science explanations (Jansen et al., 2018),
and relation extraction (Welbl et al., 2018), among
others. Extending our ideas to these challenges is
an interesting avenue for future work.
Unanswerable QA.
Prior works have used
unanswerable questions for robust reasoning in
single-hop (Rajpurkar et al., 2018) and multi-
hop (Ferguson et al., 2020; Trivedi et al., 2020)

settings. IIRC (Ferguson et al., 2020) focuses on
open-domain QA where the unanswerable ques-
tions are identiﬁed by crowdsourcing questions
where relevant knowledge couldn’t be retrieved
from Wikipedia. Our idea to make unanswerable
multihop questions by removing support para-
graphs is most similar to Trivedi et al. (2020).
While they rely on annotations (potentially incom-
plete) to identify these support paragraphs, we can
use the bridge entities to remove any potential sup-
port paragraphs (containing the bridge entity) and
better ensure unanswerability.
Question
Decomposition
and
Composition.
Multihop QA datasets have been decomposed into
simpler questions (Min et al., 2019b; Talmor and
Berant, 2018) and special meaning representa-
tions (Wolfson et al., 2020). Our dataset creation
pipeline naturally provides question decomposi-
tions, which can can help develop interpretable
models (Min et al., 2019b; Khot et al., 2021).
Recent work has also used bottom-up ap-
proaches to create multihop questions (Pan et al.,
2021; Yoran et al., 2021) using rule-based meth-
ods. However, their primary goal was data aug-
mentation to improve on downstream datasets.
The questions themselves haven’t been shown to
be challenging or less cheatable.
3
Multihop Reasoning Desiderata
Multihop question answering can be seen as a se-
quence of inter-dependent reasoning steps leading
to the answer. In its most general form, these rea-
soning steps and the dependencies can be viewed
as directed acyclic graph (DAG), GQ. Each node
qi in this graph represents a reasoning step or a
“hop”, e.g., a single-hop question in multihop QA
or a KB relation traversal in graph-based KBQA.
An edge (qj, qi) ∈edges(GQ) indicates that the
reasoning step qi relies critically on the output of
the predecessor step qj. For example, in Fig. 1,
the single-hop question Q2′ depends on the an-
swer to Q1′, and the graph GQ′ is a linear chain
Q1′ →Q2′.
Given this framing, a key desirable property for
multihop reasoning is connected reasoning: Per-
forming each step qi correctly should require the
output of all its predecessor steps qj.
Analytical Intuition: Suppose a model M can
answer each qi correctly with probability p, and
it can also answer qi without the output of all its
predecessor steps with probability r ≤p.
For
simplicity, we assume these probabilities are in-
dependent across various qi. M can correctly an-
swer a k-hop question Q by identifying and per-
forming all its k reasoning steps. This will suc-
ceed with probability at most pk. Alternatively, as
an extreme case, it can “cheat” by identifying and
performing only the last step qk (the “end ques-
tion”) without considering the output of qk−1 (or
other steps) at all. This could succeed with proba-
bility as much as r, which does not decrease with
k and is thus undesirable when constructing multi-
hop datasets. Our goal is to create multihop ques-
tions that enforce connected reasoning, i.e., where
r ≪p and, in particular, r < pk, so that models
have an incentive to perform all k reasoning steps.
Not surprisingly, the connected reasoning prop-
erty is often not satisﬁed by existing datasets (Min
et al., 2019a; Chen and Durrett, 2019; Trivedi
et al., 2020), and never optimized for during
dataset construction. As a consequence, models
are able to exploit artifacts in existing datasets that
allow them to achieve high scores while bypass-
ing some of the reasoning steps, thus negating the
main purpose of building multihop datasets. Prior
work (Trivedi et al., 2020) has attempted to mea-
sure the extent of connected reasoning in current
models and datasets. However, due to the design
of existing datasets, this approach is only able to
measure this by ablating the pre-requisites of each
reasoning step, i.e., the supporting facts. Rather
than only measure, we propose a method to con-
struct multihop QA datasets that directly optimize
for this condition.
Consider question Q on the left hand side of
Fig. 1. It can be answered in two steps, Q1 and Q2.
However, the information in Q2 itself is sufﬁcient
to uniquely identify A2 from the context, even
without considering A1. That is, while there is an
intended dependency between Q1 and Q2, Q2 can
be answered correctly without requiring the out-
put of its predecessor question Q1. Our approach
constructs multihop questions that prevent this is-
sue, and thereby require the desired connected rea-
soning. Speciﬁcally, we carefully choose which
single-hop questions to compose and what context
to use such that each constituent single-hop ques-
tion necessitates the answers from one or more
previous questions.

Graph
Question
Decomposition
Who succeeded the ﬁrst President of
Namibia? Hiﬁkepunye Pohamba
1. Who was the ﬁrst President of Namibia? Sam Nujoma
2. Who succeeded Sam Nujoma? Hiﬁkepunye Pohamba
What currency is used where Billy Giles
died? pound sterling
1. At what location did Billy Giles die? Belfast
2. What part of the UK is Belfast located in? Northern Ireland
3. What is the unit of currency in Northern Ireland? pound sterling
When was the ﬁrst establishment that Mc-
Donaldization is named after, open in the
country Horndean is located? 1974
1. What is McDonaldization named after? McDonald’s
2. Which state is Horndean located in? England
3. When did the ﬁrst McDonald’s open in England? 1974
When did Napoleon occupy the city where
the mother of the woman who brought
Louis XVI style to the court died? 1805
1. Who brought Louis XVI style to the court? Marie Antoinette
2. Who’s mother of Marie Antoinette? Maria Theresa
3. In what city did Maria Theresa die? Vienna
4. When did Napoleon occupy Vienna? 1805
How many Germans live in the colonial
holding in Aruba’s continent that was gov-
erned by Prazeres’s country? 5 million
1. What continent is Aruba in? South America
2. What country is Prazeres? Portugal
3. Colonial holding in South America governed by Portugal? Brazil
4. How many Germans live in Brazil? 5 million
When
did
the
people
who
captured
Malakoff
come
to
the
region
where
Philipsburg is located? 1625
1. What is Philipsburg capital of? Saint Martin
2. Saint Martin is located on what terrain feature? Caribbean
3. Who captured Malakoff? French
4. When did the French come to the Caribbean? 1625
Table 1:
The six reasoning graph shapes (2-hop to 4-hop) present in MuSiQue, along with sample questions.
4
Connected Reasoning via Composition
The central issue we want to address is ensur-
ing connected reasoning. Our solution is to use a
bottom-up approach where we compose multihop
questions from a large pool of single-hop ques-
tions. As we show later, this approach allows us
to explore a large space of multihop questions and
carefully select ones that require connected rea-
soning. Additionally, with each multihop ques-
tion, we will have associated constituent ques-
tions, their answers and supporting paragraphs,
which can help develop more interpretable mod-
els. Here we describe the high-level process and
describe the speciﬁcs in the next section.
4.1
Multihop via Single-hop Composition
As mentioned earlier, multihop questions can be
viewed as a sequence of reasoning steps where
answer from one reasoning step is used to iden-
tify the next reasoning step. Therefore, we can
use single-hop questions containing answers from
other questions to construct potential multihop
questions. E.g., in Fig. 1, Q2’ mentions A1’, and
hence single-hop questions Q1’ and Q2’ can be
composed to create a DAG Q1′ →Q2′ and mul-
tihop question Q’ (right). Concretely, to create a
multihop question from two single-hop questions,
we have a composability criteria: Two single-
hop question answer tuples (q1, a1) and (q2, a2)
are composable into a multihop question Q with
a2 as a valid answer if a1 is a named entity and it
is mentioned in q2. See §5:S2 for detailed criteria.
This process of composing multihop questions
can be chained together to form candidate reason-
ing graphs of various shapes and sizes (examples
in Table 1). Formally, each multihop question Q
has an underlying DAG GQ representing the com-
position of the single-hop questions q1, q2, . . . , qn,
which form the nodes of GQ.
A directed edge
(qj, qi) indicates that qi depends on the answer of
the previous sub-question qj. ai is the answer to
qi, and thereby, an is the answer to Q.
4.2
Ensuring Connected Reasoning
Given the graph GQ associated with a question
Q, ensuring connected reasoning requires ensur-
ing that for each edge (qj, qi) ∈edges(GQ), ar-
riving at answer ai using qi, necessitates the use
of aj. In other words, without aj, there isn’t sufﬁ-
cient information in qi to arrive at ai.
The existence of such information can be
probed by training a strong QA model M on sub-
questions (qi) with the mention of their predeces-
sor’s answer (aj) masked out (removed). If, on
held out data, the model can identify a subques-
tion’s answer (ai) without its predecessor’s answer
(aj), we say the edge (qj, qi) is disconnected. For-
mally, we say Q requires connected reasoning if:
∀(qj, qi) ∈edges(GQ) : M(qmj
i
)̸ = ai
(1)
where qmj
i
denotes the subquestion formed from
qi by masking out the mention of the answer aj.
Consider the masked questions Q2 and Q2’ in
Fig. 1. While Q2 can easily be answered without

answer A1, Q2’ can’t be answered without A1’
and Q’ hence satisﬁes condition (1).
4.3
Reading Comprehension Setting
While our proposed framework makes no assump-
tions about the choice of the model, and is applica-
ble to open-domain setting, we focus on the Read-
ing Comprehension (RC) setting, where we’ve a
ﬁxed set of paragraphs as context, C.
In a RC setting, apart from requiring the depen-
dence between the reasoning steps, we also want
the model to depend on the context to answer each
question. While this requirement seems unneces-
sary, previous works have shown that RC datasets
often have artifacts that allow models to predict the
answer without the context (Kaushik and Lipton,
2018) and can even memorize the answers (Lewis
et al., 2021) due to train-test leakage. As we will
show later, previous multihop RC datasets can be
cheated via such shortcuts. To ensure the depen-
dence between the question and context, we mod-
ify the required condition in Eqn. (1) to:
∀(qj, qi) ∈edges(GQ) : M(qmj
i
; C)̸ = ai
∧
∀qi ∈nodes(GQ) : M(qi; φ)̸ = ai
(2)
In summary, we want multihop reading com-
prehension questions that satisfy condition (2) for
a strong trained model M.
If it does, we say
that the question satisﬁes the MuSiQue condi-
tion. Our dataset construction pipeline optimizes
for this condition as described next.
5
Dataset Construction Pipeline
The high-level schematic of the pipeline is shown
in Fig. 2. We begin with a large set of RC single-
hop questions from 5 English Wikipedia-based
datasets, SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016), Natural
Questions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019), MLQA (en-
en) (Lewis et al., 2020b), T-REx (ElSahar et al.,
2018), Zero Shot RE (Levy et al., 2017), where
instances are of the form (qi, pi, ai) referring to
the question, the associated paragraph, and the an-
swer, respectively. For Natural Questions, as the
context is very long (entire Wikipedia page), we
use the annotated long answer (usually a para-
graph) from the dataset as the context, and the an-
notated short answer as the answer. Then, we take
the following two steps:
S1. Find Good Single-hop Questions.
Even a
tolerably small percentage of issues in single-hop
questions can compound into an intolerably large
percentage in the composed multihop questions.
To mitigate this, we ﬁrst remove questions that are
likely annotation errors. Since manually identify-
ing such questions at scale is laborious, we use a
model-based approach. We remove the questions
for which none of ﬁve large trained QA models3
can predict the associated answer with > 0 an-
swer F1. Furthermore, we remove (i) erroneous
questions where the answer spans are not in the
context, (ii) questions with < 20 word context as
we found them to be too easy, and (iii) questions
with > 300 word context to prevent ﬁnal multihop
question context from being too long for current
long-range transformer models.
S2.
Find Composable Single-hop Pairs.
To
create 2-hop questions, we ﬁrst collect distinct
single-hop question pairs with a bridge entity.
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd pairs (q1, p1, a1) and (q2, p2,
a2) such that (i) a1 is a named entity also men-
tioned in q2, (ii) a2 is not in q1, and (iii) p1̸ = p2.
Such pairs can be combined to form a 2-hop ques-
tion (Q, {p1, p2}, a2). To ensure the mentions
(a1 and its occurrence in q2 denoted e2) refer to
the same entity, we ensure: 1. Spacy entity tag-
ger (Honnibal et al., 2020) tags a1 and e2 as en-
tities of the same type. 2. A Wikipedia search
with a1 and e2 returns identical 1st result. 3. A
SOTA Wikiﬁcation model (Wu et al., 2020) re-
turns the same result for a1 and e2. At a later step
(S7) when humans write composed questions from
DAGs, they get to remove questions containing er-
roneous pairs. Only 8% of the pairs are pruned in
that step, indicating that step S2 is quite effective.
S3. Filter Disconnected Single-hop Pairs.
We
want connected 2-hop questions – questions that
cannot be answered without using the answers
of the constituent single-hop questions.
The
MuSiQue condition (2) states that for a 2-hop
question to be connected, either sub-question qi
should not be correctly answered without its con-
text (M(qi, φ)̸ = ai) and the tail question q2
should not be correctly answered when a1 is re-
moved from it (M(qm1
2 , C)̸ = a2). Accordingly
we use a two step ﬁltering process to ﬁnd con-
nected 2-hop questions. For simplicity, and be-
cause the second condition already ﬁlters some tail
3Two random-seed variants of RoBERTa-large (Liu et al.,
2019), two random-seeds of Longformer-Large (Beltagy
et al., 2020) and one UniﬁedQA (Khashabi et al., 2020).

Text
MuSiQue-Full
MuSiQue-Ans
Find Good
Single-Hop
Questions
Find
Composable
Single-Hop
Pairs
Filter out
Disconnected
Single-Hop
Pairs
Connected 
2-Hop Questions
Minimize
Train-Test
Leakage
Build
Contexts for
Questions
Add Un-
answerable
Questions
1
2
3
4
5
6
8
All Single-Hop
Questions
Good Single-Hop
Questions
Composable 
2-Hop Questions
Multi (2-4) 
Hop Questions
Reduced Train-
Test Leakage
Dev
Test
Train
Positive
Distractors
sufficient
insufficient
Composed
Questions
7
MuSiQue
(♫)
Pipeline
Crowdsource
Question
Compositions
Build
Multihop
Questions
2017K 1-Hop Qns
760K 1-Hop Qns
12M 2-Hop Qns
3.2M 2-Hop Qns
78K 2-4 Hop Qns
27K 2-4 Hop Qns
25K 2-4 Hop Qns
25K 2-4 Hop Qns
50K 2-4 Hop Qns
Figure 2: MuSiQue construction pipeline. MuSiQue pipline takes single-hop questions from existing datasets,
explores the space of multihop questions that can be composed from them, and generates dataset of challenging
multihop questions that are difﬁcult to cheat on. MuSiQue pipeline also makes unanswerable multihop questions
that makes the ﬁnal dataset signiﬁcantly more challenging.
questions, our current implementation enforces
the ﬁrst condition only on the head question, q1.
Filtering Head Nodes: We collect all questions
that appear at least once as the head of compos-
able 2-hop questions (q1) to create a set of head
nodes.
We create 5-fold train-test splits of this
set and train two Longformer-Large models (dif-
ferent seeds) per split (train on three, validate and
test on one). We generate answer predictions us-
ing the 2 models on their corresponding test splits
resulting in 2 predictions per question. We accept
a head question if, on average, the predicted an-
swers’ word overlap (computed using answer f1)
with the answer label is < 0.5.
Filtering Tail Nodes: We create a unique set
of masked single-hop questions that occur as a
tail node (q2) in any composable 2-hop question.
If the same single-hop question occurs in two 2-
hop questions with different masked entities, they
both are added to the set. We combine the gold-
paragraph with 9 distractor paragraphs (retrieved 4
using the question without the masked entities as
query). As before, we create 5-fold train-test splits
and use 2 Longformer-Large models to get 2 an-
swer and support predictions.
We accept a tail
question if either mean answer F1 ≤0.25, or if
it’s ≤0.75 and mean support F1 < 1.0.
The thresholds for head and tail node ﬁltering
were chosen via a manual inspection of a few pre-
dictions in various ranges of the parameters, and
gauging at what F1 values does the model’s an-
4We use the BM25 algorithm via Elasticsearch.
swer semantically match the correct answer (e.g.,
"Barack Obama" and "President Barack Obama"
overlap with 0.8 answer F1).
Controlling these
thresholds provides a way to trade-off between the
degree of cheatability allowed in the dataset and
the size of the ﬁnal dataset. We aim to limit cheata-
bility while retaining a reasonable dataset size.
Finally, only 2-hop questions for which both
head and tail node are acceptable are kept. We call
this process Disconnection Filtering.
S4. Build Multihop Questions.
We now have a
set of connected 2-hop questions, which form di-
rected edges of a graph. Any subset DAG of it can
be used to create a connected multihop question.
We use 6 types of reasoning graphs with 2-4 hops
as shown in Table 1. To avoid very long questions,
we limit single-hop questions to ≤10 tokens, the
total length of questions in 2,3-hops to ≤15, and
3-hops to ≤20 tokens. To ensure diversity, we
(1) cap the reuse of bridging entities and single-
hop questions at 25 and 100 multihop questions
respectively (2) remove any n-hop question that’s
subset of any m-hop question (m > n > 1).
S5. Minimize Train-Test Leakage.
We devise a
procedure to create train, validation and test splits
such that models cannot achieve high-scores via
memorization enabled by train-test leakage, an
issue observed in some existing datasets (Lewis
et al., 2021). Our procedure ensures that the train-
ing set has no overlap with validation or the test
sets, and tries to keep the overlap between valida-

tion and test sets minimal.
We consider two multihop questions Qi and Qj
to overlap if any of the following are common
between Qi and Qj: (i) single-hop question (ii)
answer to any single-hop question (iii) associated
paragraph to any single-hop question. To mini-
mize such overlap, we take a set of multihop ques-
tions, greedily ﬁnd a subset of given size (S) which
least overlaps with its complement (S’), and then
remove overlapping questions from S’, to get train
(S) and dev+test set (S’). Then, we split dev+test
to dev and test similarly. We ensure the distribu-
tion of source datasets of single-hop questions in
train, dev and test are similar, and also control the
proportion of 2-4 hop questions.
S6. Build Contexts for Questions.
For an n-
hop question, the context has 20 paragraphs con-
taining: (i) supporting paragraphs associated with
its single-hop questions {p1, p2 . . . pn}, (ii) dis-
tractor paragraphs retrieved using a query that is a
concatenation of single-hop questions from which
all intermediate answer mentions are removed. To
make distractor paragraphs harder to identify, we
retrieve them from the set of gold-paragraphs for
the ﬁltered single-hop question (S1).
S7. Crowdsource Question Compositions.
We
crowdsource question compositions on Amazon
MTurk, where workers composed coherent ques-
tions from our ﬁnal DAGs of single-hop questions.
In the interface (Fig. 3), workers could see a list
of single-hop questions with their associated para-
graphs and how they are connected via bridge en-
tities. They were ﬁrst asked to check whether all
pairs of mentions of bridge entities indeed refer to
the same underlying entity. If they answered ‘yes’
for each pair,5 they were asked to compose a nat-
ural language question ensuring that information
from all single-hop questions in the DAG is used,
and the answer to the composed question is the
same as the last single-hop question. If they an-
swered ‘no’ for any of the pairs, we discarded that
question. Our tutorial provided them with several
handwritten good and bad examples for each of the
2-4 hop compositions. Workers were encouraged
to write short questions and make implicit infer-
ences when possible. They were allowed to split
questions into two sentences if needed.
We carried out a qualiﬁcation round where 100
workers participated to perform the aforemen-
5They answered yes 92% of the time, on average.
2-hop
3-hop
4-hop
Total (24,814)
Train
14376
4387
1175
19938
Dev
1252
760
405
2417
Test
1271
763
425
2459
Table 2: Dataset statistics of MuSiQue-Ans. MuSiQue-
Full contains twice the number of questions in each cat-
egory above – one answerable and one unanswerable.
tioned task on 20 examples each. We manually
evaluated these annotations for correctness and co-
herence, and selected 17 workers to annotate the
full dataset.
To ensure dataset quality, we car-
ried out crowdsourcing in 9 batches, reading 10-
20 random examples from each worker after each
batch and sending relevant feedback via email, if
needed. Workers were paid 25, 40, and 60 cents
for each 2, 3, and 4 hop question, amounting to
∼15 USD per hour, totaling ∼11K USD.
We refer to the dataset at this stage as
MuSiQue-Ans or  -Ans.
S8.
Add Unanswerable Questions.
For each
answerable multihop RC instance we create a cor-
responding unanswerable multihop RC instance
using the procedure similar to the one proposed
in (Trivedi et al., 2020). For a multihop question
we randomly sample any of its single-hop question
and make it unanswerable by ensuring the answer
to that single-hop question doesn’t appear in any
of the paragraphs in context (except this require-
ment, the context is built as described in S6). Since
one of the single-hop questions is unanswerable,
the whole multihop question is unanswerable.
The task now is to predict whether the question
is answerable, and predict the answer and support
if it’s answerable. Given the questions for answer-
able and unanswerable pair are identical and the
context marginally changes, models that rely on
shortcuts ﬁnd this new task very difﬁcult. We call
the dataset at this stage MuSiQue-Full or  -Full,
and both datasets together as MuSiQue.
Final Dataset.
The statistics for  -Ans ( -
Full has twice the number of questions in each
cell) are shown in Table 2. MuSiQue constitutes
unique 21020 single-hop questions, 4132 answers
to multihop questions, 19841 answers to single-
hop questions, and 7676 supporting paragraphs.
MuSiQue has 6 types of reasoning graphs and 2-4
hops (cf. Table 1 for examples).

In summary, our construction pipeline allows
us to produce a dataset with mixed hops, multiple
types of reasoning graphs, and unanswerable sub-
questions, all of which make for a more challeng-
ing and less cheatable dataset (as we will quantify
in Section 8). Question decomposition, which is a
natural outcome of our construction pipeline, can
also be used to aid decomposition-based QA re-
search (Min et al., 2019b; Khot et al., 2021).
6
Dataset Quality Assessment
Quality of  -Ans.
To assess the quality of  -
Ans, we ﬁrst evaluate how well humans can an-
swer questions in it. Note that we already have
gold answers and supporting paragraphs from our
construction pipeline. This goal is therefore not to
determine gold labels, but rather to measure how
well humans perform on the task treating our gold
labels as correct.
We sample 125 questions from  -Ans valida-
tion and test sets, and obtain 3 annotations (answer
and supporting paragraphs) for each question. We
used Amazon Mechanical Turk,6 selecting crowd-
source workers as described in §7.3.
Workers were shown the question and all para-
graphs in the context, and were asked to high-
light the answer span and checkmark the support-
ing paragraphs. Our interface (Fig.
4) allowed
for searching, sorting, and ﬁltering the list of para-
graphs easily with interactive text-overlap-based
search queries. The instructions included worked
out examples.
We compute human performance by compar-
ing against gold labels for answer and support
in two ways: 1) Human Score—the most fre-
quent answer and support among the three anno-
tators breaking ties at random (the strategy used
by Rajpurkar et al. (2018)), and 2) Human Upper
Bound (UB)—the answer and support that maxi-
mizes the score (as done by Yang et al. (2018)).
Furthermore, to assess how well human agree
with each other (ignoring our gold labels), we also
compute the Human Agreement (Agr) score (Ra-
jpurkar et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2018). Speciﬁ-
cally, we treat one of 3 annotations, chosen ran-
domly, as predicted, and evaluate it against rest of
the annotations, which are treated as correct.
Table 3 demonstrates that  -Ans is a high-
quality dataset.
Furthermore, as we will dis-
cuss in §7.3, we also compare our human perfor-
6https://www.mturk.com
Human
Score
UB
Agr
Answer F1
78.0
88.6
84.1
Support F1
93.9
97.3
91.4
Table 3: Human performance (score and upper bound)
and agreement on MuSiQue-Ans.
mance with two other similar datasets (HotpotQA
and 2WikiMultihopQA), and show that  -Ans is
close to them under these metrics (§8).
Quality of  -Full.
We perform an additional
manual validation to assess dataset quality of  -
Full.
Recall that  -Full shares the answerable
questions with  -Ans, the only extra task in
 -Full being determining the answerability of a
question from the given context. To assess the va-
lidity of this task, we sampled 50 random instances
from  -Full, and one of the authors determined
the answerability of each question from its con-
text. We found that in 45 out of the 50 instances
(90%) the human predicted answerability matched
the gold label, showing that  -Full is a also high-
quality dataset.
Multihop Nature of MuSiQue.
Finally, we as-
sess the extent to which  -Ans satisﬁes the
MuSiQue condition (Eqn. 2) for connected rea-
soning. To this end, we ﬁrst estimate what per-
centage of head and tail questions in the valida-
tion set would we retain if we were to repeat our
disconnection ﬁltering procedure (S3) with mod-
els trained on the ﬁnal training data. This captures
the fraction of the questions in  -Ans that satisfy
the MuSiQue condition. We then compare it with
the respective numbers from the original step S3.
In the original disconnection ﬁltering step, we
retained only 26.5% of the tail questions, whereas
we would have retained 79.0% of the tail ques-
tions had we ﬁltered the ﬁnal validation dataset.
For head questions, we see a less dramatic but still
signiﬁcant effect—we originally retained 74.5%
questions, and would now have retained 87.7%
had we ﬁltered the ﬁnal validation set. This shows
that vastly more questions in  -Ans satisfy the
MuSiQue condition than what we started with.
7
Experimental Setup
7.1
Datasets
We compare our datasets (MuSiQue-Ans and
MuSiQue-Full) with two similar multihop RC

datasets:
distractor-setting of HotpotQA (Yang
et al., 2018) and 2WikiMultihopQA (Ho et al.,
2020).7 Both datasets have 10 paragraphs as con-
text. HQ and 2W have 2-hop and 2,4-hop ques-
tions respectively. Additionally, HQ has sentence
support and 2W has entity-relation tuples support,
but we don’t use this annotation in our training or
evaluation for a fair comparison.
HQ, 2W, and  -Ans have 90K, 167K, and 20K
training instances, respectively. For a fair com-
parison, we use equal sized training sets in all our
experiments, obtained by randomly sampling 20K
instances each from HQ and 2W, and referred to
as HQ-20k and 2W-20k, respectively.
Notation.
Instances in  -Ans, HQ, and 2W are
of the form (Q, C; A, Ps). Given a question Q
and context C consisting of a set of paragraphs,
the task is to predict the answer A and identify
supporting paragraphs Ps ∈C.  -Ans addition-
ally has gold decomposition GQ (§3), which can
be leveraged during training. Instances in  -Full
are of form (Q, C; A, Ps, S), where there’s an ad-
ditional binary classiﬁcation task to predict S, the
answerability of Q based on C, also referred to as
context sufﬁciency (Trivedi et al., 2020).
Metrics.
For  -Ans, HQ, and 2W, we report
the standard F1 based metrics for answer (An) and
support identiﬁcation (Sp); see Yang et al. (2018)
for details.
To make a fair comparison across
datasets, we use only paragraph-level support F1.
For  -Full, we follow Trivedi et al. (2020) to
combine sufﬁciency prediction S with An and Sp,
which are denoted as An+Sf and Sp+Sf. Instances
in  -Full are evaluated in pairs. For each Q with a
sufﬁcient context C, there is a paired instance with
Q and an insufﬁcient context C′. For An+Sf, if a
model incorrectly predicts context sufﬁciency (yes
or no) for either of the instances in a pair, it gets 0
pts on that pair. Otherwise, it gets same An score
on that pair as it gets on the answerable instance
in that pair. Scores are averaged across all pairs of
instances in the dataset. Likewise for Sp+Sf.
7.2
Models
Our models are Transformer-based (Vaswani
et al., 2017) language models (Devlin et al., 2019),
implemented using PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019),
HuggingFace Transformers (Wolf et al., 2019) and
7For brevity, we use HQ, 2W, -Ans/Full to refer to Hot-
potQA, 2WikiMultihopQA, MuSiQue-Ans/Full, resp.
AllenNLP (Gardner et al., 2017).
We experi-
ment with 2 types of models: (1) Multihop Mod-
els, which are in principle capable of employing
desired reasoning, and have demonstrated com-
petitive performance on previous multihop QA
datasets.
They help probe the extent to which
a dataset can be solved by current models.
(2)
Artifact-based Models, which are restricted in
some way that prohibits them from doing desired
reasoning (discussed shortly). They help probe the
extent to which a dataset can be cheated. Next, we
describe these models for  -Ans and  -Full. For
HQ and 2W, they work similar to  -Ans.
7.2.1
Multihop Models
End2End
(EE)
Model.
This
model
takes
(Q, C) as input, runs it through a transformer,
and predicts (A, Ps) as the output for  -Ans and
(A, Ps, S) for  -Full. We use Longformer-Large
as it’s one of the few transformer architectures
that is able to ﬁt the full context, and follow
Beltagy et al. (2020) for answer and support
prediction. Answerability prediction is done via
binary classiﬁcation using CLS token.
Note that our Longformer EE model is a strong
model for multihop reasoning. When trained on
full datasets, its answer F1 is 78.4 (within 3 pts
of published SOTA (Groeneveld et al., 2020)) on
HQ, and 87.7 (SOTA) on 2W.
Select+Answer (SA) Model.
This model, in-
spired by Quark (Groeneveld et al., 2020) and
SAE (Tu et al., 2020), has two parts. First, a se-
lector ranks and selects the K most relevant para-
graphs CK ⊆C.8
Speciﬁcally, given (Q, C)
as input, it classiﬁes every paragraph P
∈C
as relevant or not, and is trained with the cross-
entropy loss. Second, for MuSiQue-Ans, the an-
swerer predicts the answer and supporting para-
graphs based only on CK.
For MuSiQue-Full,
it additionally predicts answerability. Both com-
ponents are trained individually using annotations
available in the dataset. We implement a selector
using RoBERTa-large (Liu et al., 2019), and an an-
swerer using Longformer-Large.
Step Execution (EX) Model.
Similar to prior
work (Talmor and Berant, 2018; Min et al., 2019b;
Qi et al., 2021; Khot et al., 2021), this model per-
forms explicit, step-by-step multihop reasoning,
by ﬁrst decomposing the Q into a DAG GQ having
8K is a hyperparameter, chosen from {3,5,7}.

single-hop questions, and then calling single-hop
model repeatedly to execute this decomposition.
The decomposer is trained with gold decompo-
sitions, and is implemented with BART-large.
The executor takes C and the predicted DAG
GQ, and outputs (A, Ps) for MuSiQue-Ans and
(A, Ps, S) for MuSiQue-Full. It calls single-hop
model Ms repeatedly while traversing GQ along
the edges and substituting the answers.
Model Ms
is trained on only single-hop
instances—taking (qi, C) as input, and produc-
ing (A, Pi) or (A, Psi, Si) as the output. Here Pi
refers to the supporting paragraph for qi and Si
refers to whether C is sufﬁcient to answer qi. For
MuSiQue-Full, the answerer predicts Q as having
sufﬁcient context if Ms predicts all qi to have suf-
ﬁcient context. We implement 2 such single-hop
models Ms: End2End and Select+Answer, abbre-
viated as EX(EE) and EX(SA) respectively
We don’t experiment with this model on HQ,
since it needs ground-truth decomposition and in-
termediate answers, which aren’t available in HQ.
Baseline (RNN) Model.
The ﬁltering steps in
our pipeline use transformer-based models, which
could make MuSiQue particularly difﬁcult for
transformer-based models.
A natural question
then is, can a strong non-transformer model per-
form better on MuSiQue?
To answer this, we
evaluate our re-implementation of a strong RNN-
based baseline (Yang et al., 2018) (see their orig-
inal paper for details). To verify our implemen-
tation, we trained it on full HotpotQA and found
its performance to be 64.0 An (answer F1) on the
validation set, better than what’s reported by Yang
et al. (2018) (58.3 An). We thus use this model as
a strong non-transformer baseline.
7.2.2
Artifact-based Models
The Q-Only Model takes only Q as input (no
C) and generates output A for  -Ans and (A, S)
for  -Full.
We implement this with BART-
large (Lewis et al., 2020a). The C-Only Model
takes only C as input (no Q) and predicts (A, Ps)
for  -Ans and (A, Ps, S) for  -Full.
We im-
plement this with an EE Longformer-Large model
with empty Q. The 1-Para Model, like Min et al.
(2019a); Chen and Durrett (2019), is similar to SA
model with K=1. Instead of training the selector
to rank all Ps the highest, we train it to rank any
paragraph containing the answer A as the high-
est. The answerer then takes as input one selected
paragraph p ∈Ps and predicts an answer to Q
based solely on p. This model can’t access full
supporting information as all considered datasets
have at least 2 supporting paragraphs.
7.2.3
Cheatability Score
We compute the DiRe score of all datasets, which
measures the extent to which the datasets can be
cheated by strong models via Disconnected Rea-
soning (Trivedi et al., 2020).
We report scores
based on the SA model since it performed the best.
7.3
Human Performance
Apart from assessing the human performance level
on  -Ans, as discussed in §6, we also obtain hu-
man performance on HQ and 2W. For a fair com-
parison, we use the same crowdsourcing work-
ers, annotation guidelines, and interface across the
3 datasets. We sample 125 questions from each
dataset, shufﬂe them all into one set, and obtain 3
annotations per question for answer and support.
To select the workers, we ran a qualiﬁcation
round where each worker was required to identify
answer and support for at least 25 questions. We
then selected workers who had more than 75 An
and Sp scores on all datasets. 7 out of 15 workers
were qualiﬁed for rest of the validation.
8
Empirical Findings
We now discuss our ﬁndings, demonstrating that
MuSiQue is a challenging multihop dataset that
is harder to cheat on than existing datasets (§8.1)
and that the steps in the MuSiQue construction
pipeline are individually valuable (§8.2). Finally,
we explore avenues for future work (§8.3).
For HQ and 2W, we report validation set per-
formance. For  -Ans and  -Full, Table 5 reports
test set numbers; all else is on the validation set.
8.1
MuSiQue is a Challenging Dataset
Compared to HQ and 2W, both variants of
MuSiQue are less cheatable via shortcuts and have
a larger human-to-model gap.
Higher Human-Model Gap.
Top two sections
of Table 4 show  -Ans has a signiﬁcantly higher
human-model gap (computed as Human Score mi-
nus best model score) than the other datasets, for
both answer and supporting paragraph identiﬁca-
tion. In fact, for both the other datasets, support-
ing paragraph identiﬁcation has even surpassed the
human score, whereas for  -Ans, there is 14 pts

HQ-20K
2W-20K
 -Ans
An | Sp
An | Sp
An | Sp
Hu-
man
Score
84.5 | 92.5
83.2 | 99.3
78.0 | 93.9
UB
91.8 | 96.0
89.0 | 100
88.6 | 97.3
Multihop
Models
RNN
51.0 | 82.4
52.7 | 94.9
13.6 | 41.9
EE
72.9 | 94.3
72.9 | 97.6
42.3 | 67.6
SA
74.9 | 94.6
79.5 | 99.0
47.3 | 72.3
EX(EE)
—
79.8 | 97.5
45.6 | 77.8
EX(SA)
—
71.2 | 98.1
49.8 | 79.2
Artifact
Models
1-Para
64.8 | —
60.1 | —
32.0 | —
C-only
18.4 | 67.6
50.1 | 92.0
3.4 | 0.0
Q-only
19.6 | —
27.0 | —
4.6 | —
DiRe Score
68.8 | 93.0
63.4 | 98.5
37.8 | 63.4
Table 4:
Compared to the other datasets considered,
 -Ans has a much larger human-model gap (higher
gap between top and middle sections), and is much less
cheatable (lower scores in bottom two sections).
gap. Additionally,  -Ans has a ∼27 pt gap in an-
swer F1, whereas HQ and 2W have a gap of only
10 and 5, respectively.
Our best model, EX(SA), scores 57.9, 47.9, and
28.1 answer F1 on 2, 3, and 4-hop questions of  -
Ans, resp. The EE model, on the other hand, stays
around 42% irrespective of the number of hops.
Lower Cheatability.
The 3rd section of Table 4
shows that the performance of artifact-based mod-
els (§7.2.2) is much higher on HQ and 2W than
on  -Ans. E.g., the 1-Para model achieves 64.8
and 60.1 answer score on HQ and 2W, resp., but
only 32.0 on  -Ans.
Support identiﬁcation in
both datasets can be done to a surprisingly high
degree (67.6 and 92.0 F1) even without the ques-
tion (C-only model), but fails on  -Ans.9
Similarly, the last row of Table 4 shows that the
DiRe answer scores of HQ and 2W (68.8 and 63.4)
are high, indicating that even disconnected reason-
ing (bypassing reasoning steps) can achieve such
high scores. In contrast, this number is signiﬁ-
cantly lower (37.8) for  -Ans.
These results demonstrate that  -Ans is signiﬁ-
cantly less cheatable via shortcut-based reasoning.
MuSiQue-Full: Even More Challenging.
Ta-
ble 5 shows that  -Full is signiﬁcantly more dif-
ﬁcult and less cheatable than  -Ans.
Intuitively, because the answerable and unan-
swerable instances are very similar but have dif-
9Even when  -Ans is modiﬁed to have 10 paragraphs
like HQ, C-only support score remains low; cf. Table 7.
 -Ans
 -Full
An | Sp
An+Sf | Sp+Sf
Multihop
Models
EE
40.7 | 69.4
24.0 | 25.6
SA
52.3 | 75.2
34.8 | 42.1
Ex(EE)
46.4 | 78.1
32.2 | 44.2
Ex(SA)
49.0 | 80.6
32.2 | 44.3
Artifact
Models
1-Para
35.7 | —
2.3 | —
C-only
3.7 | 0.0
1.6 | 1.1
Q-only
4.6 | —
0.0 | —
Table 5:  -Full is harder (top row) and less cheatable
(bottom row) than  -Ans. Note:  -Full has a stricter
metric that operates over instance pairs (§7.1:metrics).
ferent labels, it’s difﬁcult for models to do well
on both instances if they learn to rely on short-
cuts (Kaushik et al., 2019; Gardner et al., 2020).
All artifact-based models barely get any An+Sf or
Sp+Sf score. For all multihop models too, the An
drops by 14-17 pts and Sp by 33-44 pts.
8.2
Dataset Construction Steps are Valuable
Next, we show that the key steps of our dataset
construction pipeline (§5) are valuable.
Disconnection Filter (step 3).
To assess the ef-
fect of Disconnection Filter (DF), we ablate it
from the pipeline, ie., skip the ﬁltering compos-
able 2-hop questions to connected 2-hop ques-
tions. As we don’t have human-generated com-
posed questions for the resulting questions, we use
a seq2seq BART-large model that’s trained (using
MuSiQue) to compose questions from input de-
composition DAG. For a fair comparison, we ran-
domly subsample train set from ablated pipeline to
be of the same size as the original train set.
1-Para
C-only
EE
An | Sp
An | Sp
An | Sp

32.0 | —
3.4 | 0.0
42.3 | 67.6
 \ DF
59.2 | —
8.6 | 22.4
60.6 | 71.1
 \ RL
85.1 | —
69.5 | 42.3
87.3 | 79.3
Table 6:
Disconnection Filter (DF, step 5) and Re-
duced Train-Test Leakage (RL, step 3) of MuSiQue
pipeline are crucial for its difﬁculty (EE model) and
less cheatability (1-Para and C-only models).
Table 6 shows that DF is crucial for increas-
ing difﬁculty and reducing cheatability of the
dataset. Without DF, both multihop and artifact-
based models do much better on the resulting
datasets.

Reduced Train-Test Leakage (step 5).
To as-
sess the effect of Reduced train-test Leakage (RL),
we create a dataset the traditional way, with a ran-
dom partition into train, validation, and test splits.
For uniformity, we ensure the distribution of 2-4
hop questions in development set of the resulting
dataset from both ablated pipelines remains the
same as in the original development set. Like DF
ablation, we also normalize train set sizes.
Table 6 shows that without a careful split, the
dataset is highly solvable by multihop models
(An=87.3). Importantly, most of this high score
can also be achieved by artifact-based models: 1-
para (An=85.1) and C-only (An=69.5), revealing
the high cheatability of such a 
